--- 
source: 1985 Ando.pdf
--- 

Feeding Behaviour of Three Species of Squirrels
Author(s):  Motokazu Andō , Satoshi Shiraishi, Teru Aki Uchida
Source: Behaviour, Vol. 95, No. 1/2 (Nov., 1985), pp. 76-86
Published by: BRILL
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/4534475 .
Accessed: 20/05/2011 18:53
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at .
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=bap. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
BRILL is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Behaviour.
http://www.jstor.org


FEEDING BEHAVIOUR OF THREE SPECIES OF SQUIRRELS 
by 
MOTOKAZU ANDO, SATOSHI SHIRAISHI and TERU AKI UCHIDA')2) 
(Zoological Laboratory, Faculty of Agriculture, Kyushu University 46-06, 
Fukuoka 812, Japan) 
(With 5 Figures) 
(Acc. 12-XI-1984) 
Introduction 
Arboreal animals develop various feeding postures, because of the limita- 
tion in the place where they can position themselves on a tree. Studies on 
the feeding behaviour of arboreal mammals have been carried out mainly 
in primates (ROSE, 1978, etc.), and interspecific differences in feeding 
posture and technique are mentioned also among sciurids (EMMONS, 
1980). ANDO et al. (1984) pointed out the close relationships among 
feeding site, feeding technique and diet through the field observations on 
feeding behaviour in the Japanese 
giant flying squirrel, Petaurista 
leucogenys. 
Most of these investigations, however, were based on field observa- 
tions, and a detailed comparison of feeding behaviour under laboratory 
conditions has not yet been conducted. Therefore, a comparison among a 
larger glider (Petaurista leucogenys), a smaller glider (Pteromys momonga) and 
a ground and tree dweller (Tamias sibiricus asiaticus) for feeding behaviour 
were made to clarify the meaning of behavioural differences among them 
under experimental conditions. 
Materials and methods 
Three adult Petaurista leucogenys (1 male and 1 female both of which were reared in captivity 
and 1 male collected from a natural population), 3 adultJapanese flying squirrels, Pteromys 
momonga (2 males and 1 female collected from a natural population), and 2 adult Asiatic 
chipmunks, Tamias sibiricus asiaticus (1 male and 1 female reared in captivity) were used. 
Experiment 1 was designed to determine the extent of reach without shifting its hindfeet 
on a perch in each species. Short perches with different diameters (length 120 mm, diam. 
7 mm and 14 mm for P. leucogenys, and length 50 mm, diam. 3 mm, 7 mm and 14 mm for 
P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus) were prepared, and baits (cherries for P. leucogenys and 
') Reprint requests to the second author. 
2) We are much grateful to Professor E. W. JAMESON, Jr., University of California for 
comments on the manuscript, and to the staffs of Zoological Laboratory, Kyushu Univer- 
sity for their cooperation in the study. 


FEEDING BEHAVIOUR 
OF THREE SPECIES OF SQUIRRELS 
7 
A 7 I i K~~~~~~" 
' 
· 
Fig. 1. Photo showing a perch (an arrow) and cherries hung from the ceiling in order to 
test the reach of Petaurista leucogenys 
in Experiment 1. 
sunflower seeds for P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus) were arranged at intersections of the 
threedimensional quadrate (1 m cube with grids at intervals of 5 cm) by which the perch 
was surrounded. Baits were attached to the tip of strings suspended from the ceiling (Fig. 
1) or the tip of fine piano wires held out from underneath, so the animal could detach 
them with its mouth. In Experiment 2, the reach of each species on the same perches as in 
Experiment 1, was tested when it could lean itself against a vertical board. The board, on 
which grids were drawn at intervals of 5 cm, was put perpendicular to the axis of the 
perch, and the baits were arranged at intersections of the quadrate on the board. The 
reach of the animal was measured at various distances between the board and the perch. 
In an attempt to check the reach of each species when it clung to a vertical wire-net with 
12 mm-meshes in Experiment 3, baits were suspended near the wire-net in the same way 
as in Experiment 1, and the distance between the wire-net and the most distant bait ob- 
tained was measured. The aim of Experiment 4 was to test the manner of taking baits at- 
tached to the tip of a thin twig. Baits (sunflower seeds) were attached at random to a twig 
of the mountain cherry tree (length 1.2 m, diam. 8 mm at the basal part), whose base was 
fixed at an angle of 30°. Experiment 5 was planned to measure the reach of each species 
on the floor, upon which many sunflower seeds were scattered, without any shift of hind- 
feet and to observe the way of picking up them. In order to measure the daily frequency 
77 


M. ANDO, 
S. SHIRAISHI 
& T. A. UCHIDA 
of feeding bouts and the duration of a bout, Experiment 6 was performed as follows. Each 
animal was kept in a wire-netting cage (90 x 90 x 160 cm) provided with a nest box, a 
feeder containing sunflower seeds and a water-supplier, in a photoperiod of 14L: O1D, at a 
temperature of 23°C. Behaviour of each animal during 7 days was analyzed by using 16 
mm movie (1 frame per 10 seconds). 
Results 
Experiment 
1 (Fig. 2 and Table 1). 
The reach of each species placed on a perch (diam. 14 mm) and the ratio 
of the distance between the middle of the perch and the most distant food 
to the head and body length according to directions, were shown in Fig. 2 
and Table 1, respectively. As for the reach on the upper, frontal and 
lateral sides of the perch, P. leucogenys extended it widely in proportion to 
its body size, compared with other two species; i.e., P. leucogenys used 
forepaws effectively to draw distant food within reach of the mouth, while 
P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus always picked off a bait directly by the 
A 
B 
C 
0,0 
0 
0 
70 
5 
Q() 
14X 
mm 
- 
O0 5 
(/0~i-0 
0,5 
14'm 
110 cm 
,10cm 
, 
Fig. 2. Extent of reach in three dimensions of an adult P. leucogenys (A) (9; HB, 339 mm; 
BW, 850 g), Pteromys momonga (B) (9; HB, 175 mm; BW, 124 g) and Tamias sibiricus 
asiaticus (C) (C0; HB, 158 mm; BW, 120 g) in Experiment 1. Contour in solid line, reach 
range in a sitting posture; contour in dotted line, reach range in a hanging posture; 
numeral on each contour, distance (cm) between the middle of the perch and the contour 
plane; sketch, typical posture procuring for food. 
78 


FEEDING BEHAVIOUR 
OF THREE SPECIES OF SQUIRRELS 
79 
mouth, their forepaws playing only a supplemental role in holding the 
bait. The use of forepaws was most effective in taking food on the lateral 
side of the perch, i.e., P. leucogenys was able to bring food on the lateral 
side of the perch by swinging its forelimb horizontally without full twist of 
the body, while P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus had to turn their bodies 
sideways in order to bring their mouth to the food. As for the reach on the 
underside of the perch, the ratio of the reach to the head and body length 
was greatest in P. momonga, next in T. s. asiaticus and least in P. leucogenys. 
This difference resulted from a difference in their feeding posture. P. 
leucogenys sat on the perch, even when it drew food on the underside of the 
perch. On the other hand, when P. mononga and T. s. asiaticus were in a 
sitting posture, they could scarcely get food on the underside, but they 
were able to hang from the perch by both forepaws and hindpaws, the 
former frequently hanging by hindpaws only. 
TABLE 1. The ratio of the distance between the middle of a perch and the 
most distant food available to the head and body length in Experiment 1 
Direction 
Petaurista 
Pteromys 
Tamias sibiricus 
leucogenys 
momonga 
asiaticus 
Upwards 
1.21 
1.05 
1.06 
Laterally 
0.97 
0.55 
0.35 
Forwards 
0.78 
0.71 
0.66 
Downwards 
0.62 
1.26 
0.96 
Figure represents the mean ratio obtained for animals on the perch (diam. 14 mm). 
The reach of each species in the sitting posture became somewhat 
limited with the decrease in diameter of the perch. P. leucogenys on the 
perch (diam. 14 mm) took food on the dorsal side of the body by turning 
back, but was not able to twist the body so much on the perch (diam. 7 
mm). In P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus in the sitting posture, the reach 
hardly differed between perches of 7 to 14 mm, but it reduced a little in 
the case of 3 mm in diameter: the reach of the two species in a hanging 
posture had no relationship with the diameter of the perch. Usually, 
when eating, all species placed their hindfeet at a right angle to the axis of 
the perch, and turned around their hindpaws to the opposite side only 
when they ate up all available food; T. s. asiaticus, however, sometimes 
laid its hindfeet in parallel with the axis only on the perch (diam. 14 mm). 


80 
M. ANDO, S. SHIRAISHI 
& T. A. UCHIDA 
TABLE 2. The ratio of the distance between the middle of a perch and the 
most distant food available to the head and body length in Experiment 2 
Direction 
P. leucogenys 
P. momonga 
T. s. asiaticus 
Upwards 
1.60 
1.35 
1.24 
Laterally 
1.03 
0.78 
0.61 
Forwards 
0.75 
0.98 
0.84 
Downwards 
0.91 
1.21 
1.01 
Figure represents the mean ratio obtained for animals on the perch (diam. 14 mm). 
Experiment 
2 (Table 2 and Fig. 3) 
In each species, the reach became wider than that in Experiment 1 (Table 
2). Particularly, the ranges of P. leucogenys and P. momonga extended to the 
back side because of their ability of twisting around the body under this 
condition (Fig. 3). The reach of each species hardly varied with the 
diameters of the perch. 
Experiment 
3. 
The greatest distance between the wire-net and the accessible bait was 15 
cm in P. leucogenys and P. momonga and 10 cm in T. s. asiaticus. The ratio 
of the distance to the head and body length was as follows: P. momonga 
(0.86), T. s. asiaticus (0.63) and P. leucogenys (0.44). The difference in the 
ratio was caused by a difference in the feeding posture. P. momonga and 
T. s. asiaticus could hold their bodies by grasping the wire-net with hind- 
paws, the former being able to keep its body in a horizontal position in 
this posture. On the other hand, P. leucogenys was obliged to cling on to 
the wire-net by all fours orienting its head upwards, and consequently 
was clumsy in obtaining the baits in the clinging posture. Moreover, P. 
leucogenys fed on a bait after moving to a horizontal branch every time 
when the animal could pick off a bait, whereas P. momonga and T. s. 
asiaticus completed feeding in the hanging posture. 
Experiment 
4 (Fig. 4). 
Every species was able to take the bait even at the tip of the twig, 
although the manners were different. P. leucogenys placed the body on a 
stable support near the twig, instead of the twig itself, and obtained the 
bait by drawing the twig near the mouth with forepaws (Fig. 4). On the 
other hand, P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus walked out to the tip of the twig 


FEEDING BEHAVIOUR 
OF THREE SPECIES OF SQUIRRELS 
81 
A 
B 
C 
10 
5 
20 
14 mm 
3 mm 
30-- 
,10 
14 mm 
10 
5 
cm 
70 
0 
(10 
7 
\5`__5, 
10-00 
14 nimm 
~--5, 
10o 
10 cm 
10cm 
10cm 
Fig. 3. Reach in three dimensions of an adult P. leucogenys 
(A), P. momonga 
(B) and T. s. 
asiaticus (C) in Experiment 2. Symbols are the same as in Fig. 2. 
and removed the bait directly with incisors. Any species on the branch 
sometimes dropped the bait to the floor by accident, as was also the case 
with any animal in Experiments 1-3. P. leucogenys was quite indifferent to 
the bait dropped to the floor and tried to take another bait immediately. 
P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus, however, often climbed down to the floor 
in order to recover it. 
Experiment 
5 (Fig. 5). 
The way of picking up baits scattered on the floor may be classified into 
the following three categories according to the distance between the 
animal and the bait. 1) When the bait was close by the animal, the 
animal extended the body to take up it, and ate it after turning back to 
the sitting posture without any shift of hindfeet. 2) When the bait was too 
distant to take in the above-mentioned manner, the animal picked up it 
in the stretching posture, and fed on it after taking a step, instead of turn- 
ing back to the original place. 3) When the bait was out of the reach in the 
extending posture, the animal took a few steps before taking up it. 


82 
M. ANDO, 
S. SHIRAISHI 
& T. A. UCHIDA 
Fig. 4. Process of hauling a twig in P. leucogenys in Experiment 4. Holding out a fore-limb 
towards the twig base (A) and feeding while holding the twig in her hand (B). 
As for the manner 1), all species had the type, although the reach 
varied considerably with species. P. leucogenys obtained baits in a wide 
range including the lateral side of the body; P. momonga and T. s. asiaticus, 
however, were limited in the range only to the front of the body (Fig. 5). 
About the manner 2), T. s. asiaticus had not this type. Consequently, P. 
leucogenys could feed for a long time without shifting its hindfeet, while T. 
s. asiaticus was frequently forced to change the feeding position. Further, 
P. leucogenys and P. momonga used to eat at the place where it picked up the 
bait, while T. s. asiaticus often fed after carrying it to some other place. 
Experiment 
6 (Table 3). 
P. leucogenys and P. momonga fed in the night and T. s. asiaticus in the day. 
The duration of a feeding bout was long in order of P. leucogenys, P. 


FEEDING BEHAVIOUR 
OF THREE SPECIES OF SQUIRRELS 
83 
momonga and T. s. asiaticus (Table 3). The reverse was the case with the 
frequency of feeding bouts. 
Discussion 
1. Relations 
between 
the habitat 
and the manner 
of feeding. 
The three species differ in their habitat. P. leucogenys never descends to the 
ground (ANDO et al., 1984). Although the ecology of P. momonga is not yet 
well known, the habitat seems to include the ground, judging from the 
fact that related species of P. momonga, e.g., Glaucomys volans (MUUL, 1968) 
and Glaucomys sabrinus (KEITH & MESLOW, 1966), are active even on the 
ground. T. s. asiaticus is principally a ground dweller but climbs trees fre- 
TB 
C 
, 
10l cm 
Fig. 5. Reach range on the floor plane of an adult P. leucogenys (A), P. momonga (B) and T. 
s. asiaticus (C) in Experiment 5. Dotted area, reach range without shifting the hindfeet; 
cross-hatched area, reach range with a subsequent step forwards after seizing the food in 
the mouth footprint position of the hindfeet. 
quently. Indifference to the fallen food on the floor in P. leucogenys seems 
to reflect the entirely arboreal habit under natural conditions. Sciurus 
vulgaris orientis (YANAGAWA, pers. comm.) 
and Apodemus argenteus (Un- 
publ.), both of which are semi-arboreal animals, also descend to the 
ground to retrieve food dropped from the tree accidentally. On the other 
hand, the habit of carrying food elsewhere in T. s. asiaticus may be in- 
volved in the terrestrial habitat where it is necessarily exposed to the 
danger of predation. 
P. leucogenys, one of the largest among sciurids, suffers from the restric- 
tions of the branches' diameter and of the hindfeet's angle to the axis of 
the branch 
(ANDO et al., 
1984). 
Ratufa spp., 
squirrels 
larger than P. 
i..::.:'::'' 
... 
.. 
10 
cm 
Fig. 5. Reach range on the floor plane of an adult P. leucogenys (A), P. momonga (B) and T. 
s. asiaticus (C) in Experiment 5. Dotted area, reach range without shifting the hindfeet; 
cross-hatched area, reach range with a subsequent step forwards after seizing the food in 
the mouth; footprint, position of the hindfeet. 
quently. Indifference to the fallen food on the floor in P. leucogenys seems 
to reflect the entirely arboreal habit under natural conditions. Sciurus 
vulgaris orientis (YANAGAWA, pers. comm.) and Apodemus argenteus (Un- 
publ.), both of which are semi-arboreal animals, also descend to the 
ground to retrieve food dropped from the tree accidentally. On the other 
hand, the habit of carrying food elsewhere in T. s. asiaticus may be in- 
volved in the terrestrial habitat where it is necessarily exposed to the 
danger of predation. 
P. leucogenys, one of the largest among sciurids, suffers from the restric- 
tions of the branches' diameter and of the hindfeet's angle to the axis of 
the branch (AND0 et al., 1984). Ratufa spp., squirrels larger than P. 


84 
M. ANDO, S. SHIRAISHI & T. A. UCHIDA 
TABLE 3. Mean duration and frequency of the feeding bout in Experi- 
ment 6 
Species 
P. leucogenys 
P. momonga 
T. s. asiaticus 
Duration of a bout (min.) 
8.8 
2.2 
1.7 
Daily frequency 
4.0 
11.5 
16.5 
leucogenys, also are under similar limitations (CARTMILL, 1974). On the 
floor, P. leucogenys tries to take food in a wide range without shifting its 
hindfeet, while T. s. asiaticus tends to pick up those only just in front of 
the body. This may be attributed to the facts that the former lives in trees 
where supporting places are limited and that the latter are active mainly 
on the ground. Further, interspecific differences in the duration and fre- 
quency of feeding bouts may relate to the fact that larger flying squirrels 
incline to leaf eating, and obtain sufficient food without moving about 
(ANDO & IMAIZUMI, 1982; ANDO et al., 1984), that chipmunks, 
basically 
seed eaters (MACCLINTOCK, 
1970), have to search about for food, and 
that smaller flying squirrels have an intermediate food habit between 
them (TEZUKA, 1959; MUUL & LIM, 1978). 
2. Use of forepaws 
in feeding 
activities. 
Many arboreal squirrels can feed hanging from the tree trunk or twigs by 
hindpaws 
(HORWICH, 1971; FERRON, 1981; NOWAK & PARADISO, 1983). 
Ground squirrels, however, do not hang by hindpaws (FERRON, 1981; 
ZEGERS, 1981). The fact that P. momonga is more skillful in the hanging 
posture than T. s. asiaticus suggests that the former is more arboreal. P. 
leucogenys does not hang in spite of the completely arboreal habit, instead, 
the animal is able to reach food even on the lateral and under side of the 
perch in the sitting posture, by using its forepaws effectively. The use of 
forepaws in arboreal herbivores, such as Petaurista and Pteromyscus, is 
thought to be an adaptation for the ingestion of leaves; i.e. the forepaws 
may be used to bring a branch of leaves within the reach of the mouth 
(EISENBERG, 
1978; MUUL 
& LIM, 
1978). Squirrels belonging to the 
Petauristinae have proportionally long forelimbs in order to extend the 
area of flying membranes, 
compared with those belonging to the 
Sciurinae 
(THORINGTON & HEANEY, 1981); the effective use of forepaws in 
P. leucogenys may be facilitated by this characteristic. The ratio of the 
forelimb (humerus+ radius) length to the head and body length, 


FEEDING BEHAVIOUR 
OF THREE SPECIES OF SQUIRRELS 
85 
however, is 0.43 in P. leucogenys, 0.42 in P. momonga and 0.30 in T. s. 
asiaticus; this shows almost no difference between P. leucogenys and P. 
momonga. In this respect, further studies on the functional-morphology 
will be necessary. 
From the above-mentioned observations and discussion, it is thus con- 
cluded that the characteristics of the posture, technique and frequency of 
feeding in the three species arise from the interspecific differences in the 
diet, habitat, and freedom and length of the forelimb. 
Summary 
The Japanese giant flying squirrel, Petaurista leucogenys, 
Japanese flying squirrel, Pteromys 
momonga 
and Asiatic chipmunk, were compared for feeding behaviour under experimental 
conditions. Although P. leucogenys 
always fed in a sitting posture on branches, it extended 
its forepaws effectively both laterally and ventrally. When the animal was not able to place 
its large body on a slender twig, it brought the twig within reach of the mouth by the 
forepaws, obtaining food at the tip. P. momonga 
and T. s. asiaticus took a hanging posture, 
too, and the former was more skillful in this posture than was the latter. In picking up food 
scattered on the floor, P. leucogenys 
extended the body, without shifting its hindfeet, in a 
wide range including its lateral side; T. s. asiaticus got food in a narrow range only just in 
front of the body, and P. momonga 
had an intermediate range between those of the above 
two species. Among the three species, the daily frequency of feeding bouts was in inverse 
proportion to the duration of a feeding bout; P. leucogenys 
had relatively long and infre- 
quent bouts, the reverse being the case with T. s. asiaticus. Characteristics of the posture, 
technique and frequency of feeding in the three species were supposed to be a reflection of 
interspecific differences in the diet, habitat, and freedom and length of the forelimb. 
References 
ANDO, M. & IMAIZUMI, Y. (1982). Habitat utilization of the white-cheeked giant flying 
squirrel Petaurista leucogenys 
in a small shrine grove. - J. Mamm. Soc. Japan 9, 
p. 70-81 (in Japanese with English abstract). 
--, 
SIRAISHI, S. & UCHIDA, T. A. (1984). Field observations of the feeding behavior 
in the Japanese giant flying squirrel, Petaurista leucogenys. - J. Fac. Agr., Kyushu 
Univ. 28, p. 161-175. 
CARTMILL, M. (1974). Pads and claws in arboreal locomotion. - In: Primate locomotion 
(F. A. JENKINS, Jr., ed.). New York: Academic Press. p. 45-83. 
EISENBERG, 
J. F. (1978). The evolution of arboreal herbivores in the class Mammalia. - 
In: The ecology of arboreal folivores (G. G. MONTGOMERY, 
ed.). Washington D.C.: 
Smithsonian Institute Press, p. 135-152. 
EMMONS, L. H. (1980). Ecology and resource partitioning among nine species of African 
rain forest squirrels. - Ecol. Monogr. 50, p. 31-54. 
FERRON, J. (1981). Comparative ontogeny of behaviour in four species of squirrels 
(Sciuridae). - 
Z. Tierpsychol. 55, p. 193-216. 
HORWICH, R. H. (1971). The ontogeny of social behavior in the gray squirrel (Sciurus 
carolinensis). - 
Beih. Z. Tierpsychol. 8, p. 1-103. 
KEITH, L. B. & MESLOW, E. C. (1966). Animals using runways in common with 
snowshoe hares; -J. 
Mamm. 47, p. 541. 
MACCLINTOCK, D. (1970). Squirrels of North America. - 
New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold. 


86 
M. ANDO, 
S. SHIRAISHI 
& T. A. UCHIDA 
MUUL, I. (1968). Behavioral and physiological influences on the distribution of the flying 
squirrel, Glaucomys 
volans. - Misc. Publ. Mus. Zool., Univ. Mich. 134, p. 1-66. 
--& 
LIM, B. L. (1978). Comparative morphology, food habits and ecology of some 
Malaysian arboreal rodents. - 
In: The ecology of arboreal folivores (G. G. 
MONTGOMERY, 
ed.). Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institute Press, p. 361-368. 
NOWAK, R. M. & PARADISO, J. L. (1983). Walker's mammals of the world. - Baltimore: 
The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
ROSE, M. D. (1978). Feeding and associated positional behavior of black and white 
colobus monkeys (Colobus guereza). - In: The ecology of arboreal folivores (G. G. 
MONTGOMERY, ed.). Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institute Press, p. 253-262. 
TEZUKA, H. (1959). Notes on some habits, especially the eating method of leaves, of 
Pteromys volans amygdali in captivity. - J. Mamm. Soc. Japan 1, p. 132-134 (in 
Japanese with English summary). 
THORINGTON, 
R. W. & HEANEY, 
L. R. (1981). Body proportions and gliding adaptations 
of flying squirrels (Petauristinae). - J. Mamm. 62, p. 101-114. 
ZEGERS, D. A. (1981). Time budgets of Wyoming ground squirrels, Spermophilus elegans. 
- Great Basin Nat. 41, p. 221-228. 
Zusammenfassung 
Die Frefgverhalten des Japanischen Reisenflugh6rnchens, 
Petaurista leucogenys, des Japani- 
schen Flugh6rnchens, 
Pterymys momonga und des Gestreiften Backenh6rnchens, 
Tamias 
sibiricus asiaticus wurden durch Experiment verglichen. Das P. leucogenys nahm seine Mahl- 
zeiten stets auf Asten sitzend ein, wobei es jedoch seine Vorderextremitaten 
sowohl in 
lateraler als auch in ventraler Richtung ausstreckte. Zweige, die den schweren K6rper des 
Tieres nicht tragen konnten, holte es mit den Vorderpfoten in Reichweite der Schnauze, 
und fraft dann von der Zweigspitze. P. momonga und T. s. asiaticus nahmen auch Hainge- 
stellungen ein, wobei das erstere kunstfertiger vorging als das letztere. 
Beim Aufnehmen von auf dem Boden liegendem Futter streckte P. leucogenys seinen 
Korper aus, auch seitlich, ohne Versetzung der Hinterpfoten. T. s. asiaticus nahm nur un- 
mittelbar vor seinem Korper befindliches Futter, wahrend P. momonga einen Zwischenbe- 
reich zwischen den beiden anderen Arten bei der Futteraufnahme ausfillte. Unter den 
drei Arten stand die tagliche Haufigkeit der Futteraufnahme im umgekehrten Verhaltnis 
zur Dauer einer jeden Mahlzeit. P. leucogenys hatte relativ lange und mehrere Mahlzeiten. 
Genau das Gegenteil war beim T. s. asiaticus zu beobachten. Die Merkmale von Haltung, 
Technik und Haufigkeit beim Fressen waren als eine Reflektion der interspezifischen Un- 
terschiede in Diat, Habitat sowie Freiheit und Lange der Vorderextremitaten 
der drei 
Arten zu erwarten. 
