--- 
source: 1994.pdf
--- 

C-51
COYOTES
Jeffrey S. Green
Assistant Regional Director
USDA-APHIS-
Animal Damage Control
Lakewood, Colorado 80228
F. Robert Henderson
Extension Specialist
Animal Damage Control
Kansas State University
Manhattan, Kansas 66506-1600
Mark D. Collinge
State Director
USDA-APHIS-
Animal Damage Control
Boise, Idaho 83705
Fig. 1. Coyote, Canis latrans
Damage Prevention and
Control Methods
Exclusion
Produce livestock in confinement.
Herd livestock into pens at night.
Exclusion fences (net-wire and/or
electric), properly constructed and
maintained, can aid significantly in
reducing predation.
Cultural Methods and
Habitat Modification
Select pastures that have a lower
incidence of predation to reduce
exposure of livestock to predation.
Herding of livestock generally reduces
predation due to human presence
during the herding period.
Change lambing, kidding, and calving
seasons.
Shed lambing, kidding, and calving
usually reduce coyote predation.
Remove carrion to help limit coyote
populations.
Frightening Agents and
Repellents
Guarding dogs: Some dogs have
significantly reduced coyote
predation.
Donkeys and llamas: Some are
aggressive toward canines and have
reduced coyote predation.
Sonic and visual repellents: Strobe
lights, sirens, propane cannons, and
others have reduced predation on
both sheep and calves.
Chemical odor and taste repellents:
None have shown sufficient
effectiveness to be registered for
use.
Toxicants
M-44 ejector devices for use with
sodium cyanide-loaded plastic
capsules. They are most effective
during cold weather (fall to spring).
Livestock protection collars (LPC)
containing Compound 1080
(sodium monofluoroacetate) are
registered for use only in certain
states.
Fumigants
Gas cartridges are registered as a
burrow (den) fumigant.
Trapping
Leghold traps (Nos. 3 and 4) are
effective and are the most versatile
control tool.
Snares are effective where coyotes pass
through or under net-wire fences
and in trail sets.
PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF WILDLIFE DAMAGE — 1994
Cooperative Extension Division
Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources
University of Nebraska - Lincoln
United States Department of Agriculture
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
Animal Damage Control
Great Plains Agricultural Council
Wildlife Committee


C-52
Shooting
Shooting from the ground is effective.
Use rabbit distress calls or mimic
howling or other coyote sounds to
bring coyotes within shooting
distance.
Aerial hunting is effective in removing
coyotes where terrain, ground
cover, vegetation, regulations, and
landownership conditions permit.
Hunting with dogs is effective for trail-
ing coyotes from kill sites, locating
dens, running coyotes, and assisting
with aerial hunting or calling.
Other Methods
Denning: Remove adult coyotes and/
or their young from dens.
Identification
In body form and size, the coyote
(Canis latrans) resembles a small collie
dog, with erect pointed ears, slender
muzzle, and a bushy tail (Fig. 1).
Coyotes are predominantly brownish
gray in color with a light gray to
cream-colored belly. Color varies
greatly, however, from nearly black to
red or nearly white in some individu-
als and local populations. Most have
dark or black guard hairs over their
back and tail. In western states, typical
adult males weigh from 25 to 45
pounds (11 to 16 kg) and females from
22 to 35 pounds (10 to 14 kg). In the
East, many coyotes are larger than
their western counterparts, with males
averaging about 45 pounds (14 kg) and
females about 30 pounds (13 kg).
Coyote-dog and coyote-wolf hybrids
exist in some areas and may vary
greatly from typical coyotes in size,
color, and appearance. Also, coyotes in
the New England states may differ in
color from typical western coyotes.
Many are black, and some are reddish.
These colorations may partially be due
to past hybridization with dogs and
wolves. True wolves are also present
in some areas of coyote range, particu-
larly in Canada, Alaska, Montana,
northern Minnesota, Wisconsin, and
Michigan. Relatively few wolves
remain in the southern United States
and Mexico.
Range
Historically, coyotes were most com-
mon on the Great Plains of North
America. They have since extended
their range from Central America to
the Arctic, including all of the United
States (except Hawaii), Canada, and
Mexico.
weaker lambs are also present. Usu-
ally, the stronger lamb is on the
periphery and is more active, making
it more prone to attack than a weaker
lamb that is at the center of the flock
and relatively immobile.
Coyote predation on livestock is gener-
ally more severe during early spring
and summer than in winter for two
reasons. First, sheep and cows are usu-
ally under more intensive manage-
ment during winter, either in feedlots
or in pastures that are close to human
activity, thus reducing the opportunity
for coyotes to take livestock. Second,
predators bear young in the spring and
raise them through the summer, a pro-
cess that demands increased nutri-
tional input, for both the whelping and
nursing mother and the growing
young. This increased demand corre-
sponds to the time when young sheep
or beef calves are on pastures or range-
land and are most vulnerable to attack.
Coyote predation also may increase
during fall when young coyotes dis-
perse from their home ranges and
establish new territories.
General Biology,
Reproduction, and
Behavior
Coyotes are most active at night and
during early morning hours (especially
where human activity occurs), and
during hot summer weather. Where
there is minimal human interference
and during cool weather, they may be
active throughout the day.
Coyotes bed in sheltered areas but do
not generally use dens except when
raising young. They may seek shelter
underground during severe weather
or when closely pursued. Their physi-
cal abilities include good eyesight and
Habitat
Many references indicate that coyotes
were originally found in relatively
open habitats, particularly the grass-
lands and sparsely wooded areas of
the western United States. Whether or
not this was true, coyotes have
adapted to and now exist in virtually
every type of habitat, arctic to tropic,
in North America. Coyotes live in
deserts, swamps, tundra, grasslands,
brush, dense forests, from below sea
level to high mountain ranges, and at
all intermediate altitudes. High densi-
ties of coyotes also appear in the sub-
urbs of Los Angeles, Pasadena,
Phoenix, and other western cities.
Food Habits
Coyotes often include many items in
their diet. Rabbits top the list of their
dietary components. Carrion, rodents,
ungulates (usually fawns), insects
(such as grasshoppers), as well as live-
stock and poultry, are also consumed.
Coyotes readily eat fruits such as
watermelons, berries, and other veg-
etative matter when they are available.
In some areas coyotes feed on human
refuse at dump sites and take pets
(cats and small dogs).
Coyotes are opportunistic and gener-
ally take prey that is the easiest to
secure. Among larger wild animals,
coyotes tend to kill young, inexperi-
enced animals, as well as old, sick, or
weakened individuals. With domestic
animals, coyotes are capable of catch-
ing and killing healthy, young, and in
some instances, adult prey. Prey selec-
tion is based on opportunity and a
myriad of behavioral cues. Strong,
healthy lambs are often taken from a
flock by a coyote even though smaller,


C-53
hearing and a keen sense of smell.
Documented recoveries from severe
injuries are indicative of coyotes’
physical endurance. Although not as
fleet as greyhound dogs, coyotes have
been measured at speeds of up to 40
miles per hour (64 km/hr) and can
sustain slower speeds for several miles
(km).
Distemper, hepatitis, parvo virus, and
mange (caused by parasitic mites) are
among the most common coyote dis-
eases. Rabies and tularemia also occur
and may be transmitted to other ani-
mals and humans. Coyotes harbor
numerous parasites including mites,
ticks, fleas, worms, and flukes. Mortal-
ity is highest during the first year of
life, and few survive for more than 10
to 12 years in the wild. Human activity
is often the greatest single cause of
coyote mortality.
Coyotes usually breed in February and
March, producing litters about 9
weeks (60 to 63 days) later in April and
May. Females sometimes breed during
the winter following their birth, par-
ticularly if food is plentiful. Average
litter size is 5 to 7 pups, although up to
13 in a litter has been reported. More
than one litter may be found in a single
den; at times these may be from
females mated to a single male. As
noted earlier, coyotes are capable of
hybridizing with dogs and wolves, but
reproductive dysynchrony and
behaviors generally make it unlikely.
Hybrids are fertile, although their
breeding seasons do not usually corre-
spond to those of coyotes.
Coyote dens are found in steep banks,
rock crevices, sinkholes, and under-
brush, as well as in open areas. Usu-
ally their dens are in areas selected for
protective concealment. Den sites are
typically located less than a mile (km)
from water, but may occasionally be
much farther away. Coyotes will often
dig out and enlarge holes dug by
smaller burrowing animals. Dens vary
from a few feet (1 m) to 50 feet (15 m)
and may have several openings.
Both adult male and female coyotes
hunt and bring food to their young for
several weeks. Other adults associated
with the denning pair may also help in
feeding and caring for the young. Coy-
otes commonly hunt as singles or
pairs; extensive travel is common in
their hunting forays. They will hunt in
the same area regularly, however, if
food is plentiful. They occasionally
bury food remains for later use.
Pups begin emerging from their den
by 3 weeks of age, and within 2
months they follow adults to large
prey or carrion. Pups normally are
weaned by 6 weeks of age and fre-
quently are moved to larger quarters
such as dense brush patches and/or
sinkholes along water courses. The
adults and pups usually remain
together until late summer or fall
when pups become independent.
Occasionally pups are found in groups
until the breeding season begins.
Coyotes are successful at surviving
and even flourishing in the presence of
people because of their adaptable
behavior and social system. They typi-
cally display increased reproduction
and immigration in response to
human-induced population reduction.
Damage and Damage
Identification
Coyotes can cause damage to a variety
of resources, including livestock, poul-
try, and crops such as watermelons.
They sometimes prey on pets and are a
threat to public health and safety when
they frequent airport runways and
residential areas, and act as carriers of
rabies. Usually, the primary concern
regarding coyotes is predation on live-
stock, mainly sheep and lambs. Preda-
tion will be the focus of the following
discussion.
Since coyotes frequently scavenge on
livestock carcasses, the mere presence
of coyote tracks or droppings near a
carcass is not sufficient evidence that
predation has taken place. Other evi-
dence around the site and on the car-
cass must be carefully examined to aid
in determining the cause of death.
Signs of a struggle may be evident.
These may include scrapes or drag
marks on the ground, broken vegeta-
tion, or blood in various places around
the site. The quantity of sheep or calf
remains left after a kill vary widely
depending on how recently the kill
was made, the size of the animal
killed, the weather, and the number
and species of predators that fed on
the animal.
One key in determining whether a
sheep or calf was killed by a predator
is the presence or absence of subcuta-
neous (just under the skin) hemor-
rhage at the point of attack. Bites to a
dead animal will not produce hemor-
rhage, but bites to a live animal will. If
enough of the sheep carcass remains,
carefully skin out the neck and head to
observe tooth punctures and hemor-
rhage around the punctures. Talon
punctures from large birds of prey will
also cause hemorrhage, but the loca-
tion of these is usually at the top of the
head, neck, or back. This procedure
becomes less indicative of predation as
the age of the carcass increases or if the
remains are scanty or scattered.
Coyotes, foxes, mountain lions, and
bobcats usually feed on a carcass at the
flanks or behind the ribs and first con-
sume the liver, heart, lungs, and other
viscera. Mountain lions often cover a
carcass with debris after feeding on it.
Bears generally prefer meat to viscera
and often eat first the udder from lac-
tating ewes. Eagles skin out carcasses
on larger animals and leave much of
the skeleton intact. With smaller ani-
mals such as lambs, eagles may bite off
and swallow the ribs. Feathers and
“whitewash” (droppings) are usually
present where an eagle has fed.
Coyotes may kill more than one ani-
mal in a single episode, but often will
only feed on one of the animals.
Coyotes typically attack sheep at the
throat, but young or inexperienced
coyotes may attack any part of the
body. Coyotes usually kill calves by
eating into the anus or abdominal area.
Dogs generally do not kill sheep or
calves for food and are relatively
indiscriminate in how and where they
attack. Sometimes, however, it is
difficult to differentiate between dog
and coyote kills without also looking
at other sign, such as size of tracks
(Fig. 2) and spacing and size of canine


C-54
tooth punctures. Coyote tracks tend to
be more oval-shaped and compact
than those of common dogs. Nail
marks are less prominent and the
tracks tend to follow a straight line
more closely than those of dogs. The
average coyote’s stride at a trot is 16 to
18 inches (41 to 46 cm), which is typi-
cally longer than that of a dog of simi-
lar size and weight. Generally, dogs
attack and rip the flanks, hind quar-
ters, and head, and may chew ears.
The sheep are sometimes still alive but
may be severely wounded.
Accurately determining whether or
not predation occurred and, if so, by
what species, requires a considerable
amount of knowledge and experience.
Evidence must be gathered, pieced
together, and then evaluated in light of
the predators that are in the area, the
time of day, the season of the year, and
numerous other factors. Sometimes
even experts are unable to confirm the
cause of death, and it may be neces-
sary to rely on circumstantial informa-
tion. For more information on this
subject, refer to the section Procedures
for Evaluating Predation on Livestock
and Wildlife, in this book.
Legal Status
The status of coyotes varies depending
on state and local laws. In some states,
including most western states, coyotes
are classified as predators and can be
taken throughout the year whether or
not they are causing damage to live-
stock. In other states, coyotes may be
taken only during specific seasons and
often only by specific methods, such as
trapping. Night shooting with a spot-
light is usually illegal. Some state laws
allow only state or federal agents to
use certain methods (such as snares) to
take coyotes. Some states have a provi-
sion for allowing the taking of pro-
tected coyotes (usually by special
permit) when it has been documented
that they are preying on livestock. In
some instances producers can apply
control methods, and in others, control
must be managed by a federal or state
agent. Some eastern states consider the
coyote a game animal, a furbearer, or a
protected species.
Damage Prevention and
Control Methods
For managing coyote damage, a vari-
ety of control methods must be avail-
able since no single method is effective
in every situation. Success usually
involves an integrated approach, com-
bining good husbandry practices with
effective control methods for short
periods of time. Regardless of the
means used to stop damage, the focus
should be on damage prevention and
control rather than elimination of coy-
otes. It is neither wise nor practical to
kill all coyotes. It is important to try to
prevent coyotes from killing calves or
sheep for the first time. Once a coyote
has killed livestock, it will probably
continue to do so if given the
Wolf
Red fox
4"
Large dog
Fig. 2. Footprints of canid predators
Federal statutes that pertain to wildlife
damage control include the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenti-
cide Act (FIFRA), which deals with
using toxicants, and the Airborne
Hunting Act, which regulates aerial
hunting.
Laws regulating coyote control are not
necessarily uniform among states or
even among counties within a state,
and they may change frequently. A
1989 Supreme Court action established
that it was not legal to circumvent the
laws relative to killing predators, even
to protect personal property (livestock)
from predation.
2 1/2"
3"
Coyote
5"


C-55
opportunity. Equally important is
taking action as quickly as possible to
stop coyotes from killing after they
start.
Exclusion
Most coyotes readily cross over,
under, or through conventional live-
stock fences. A coyote’s response to a
fence is influenced by various factors,
including the coyote’s experience and
motivation for crossing the fence. Total
exclusion of all coyotes by fencing,
especially from large areas, is highly
unlikely since some eventually learn to
either dig deeper or climb higher to
defeat a fence. Good fences, however,
can be important in reducing preda-
tion, as well as increasing the effective-
ness of other damage control methods
(such as snares, traps, or guarding
animals).
Recent developments in fencing equip-
ment and design have made this
technique an effective and economi-
cally practical method for protecting
sheep from predation under some
grazing conditions. Exclusion fencing
may be impractical in western range
sheep ranching operations.
Net-Wire Fencing. Net fences in
good repair will deter many coyotes
from entering a pasture. Horizontal
spacing of the mesh should be less
than 6 inches (15 cm), and vertical
spacing less than 4 inches (10 cm). Dig-
ging under a fence can be discouraged
by placing a barbed wire at ground
level or using a buried wire apron
(often an expensive option). The fence
should be about 5 1/2 feet (1.6 m) high
to discourage coyotes from jumping
over it. Climbing can usually be pre-
vented by adding a charged wire at
the top of the fence or installing a wire
overhang.
Barrier fences with wire overhangs
and buried wire aprons were tested in
Oregon and found effective in keeping
coyotes out of sheep pastures (Fig. 3).
The construction and materials for
such fencing are usually expensive.
Therefore, fences of this type are rarely
used except around corrals, feedlots,
or areas of temporary sheep confine-
ment.
56"
Fig. 3. Barrier fence with wire overhang and
buried apron.
Electric Fencing. Electric fencing,
used for years to manage livestock, has
recently been revolutionized by the
introduction of new energizers and
new fence designs from Australia and
New Zealand. The chargers, now also
manufactured in the United States,
have high output with low impedance,
are resistant to grounding, present a
minimal fire hazard, and are generally
safe for livestock and humans. The
fences are usually constructed of
smooth, high-tensile wire stretched to
a tension of 200 to 300 pounds (90 to
135 kg). The original design of electric
fences for controlling predation con-
sisted of multiple, alternately charged
and grounded wires, with a charged
trip wire installed just above ground
level about 8 inches (20 cm) outside the
main fence to discourage digging.
Many recent designs have every wire
charged.
The number of spacings between wires
varies considerably. A fence of 13
strands gave complete protection to
sheep from coyote predation in tests at
the USDA’s US Sheep Experiment Sta-
tion (Fig. 4). Other designs of fewer
wires were effective in some studies,
ineffective in others.
The amount of labor and installation
techniques required vary with each
type of fencing. High-tensile wire
fences require adequate bracing at cor-
ners and over long spans. Electric fenc-
ing is easiest to install on flat, even
terrain. Labor to install a high-tensile
electric fence may be 40% to 50% less
than for a conventional livestock fence.
Labor to keep electric fencing func-
tional can be significant. Tension of the
wires must be maintained, excessive
vegetation under the fence must be
removed to prevent grounding, dam-
69"
28"
3" treated pole
7' long
1/4" x 4 1/2" carriage bolt
galvanized woven wire
23" apron
(old fencing)
72" galvanized
fencing
  6" stays
  4" vertical
spacing at top
1 1/2" at the
bottom


C-56
age from livestock and wildlife must
be repaired, and the charger must be
checked regularly to ensure that it is
operational.
Coyotes and other predators occasion-
ally become “trapped” inside electric
fences. These animals receive a shock
as they enter the pasture and subse-
quently avoid approaching the fence to
escape. In some instances the captured
predator may be easy to spot and
remove from the pasture, but in
others, particularly in large pastures
with rough terrain, the animal may be
difficult to remove.
Electric Modification of Existing
Fences. The cost to completely
replace old fences with new ones,
whether conventional or electric, can
be substantial. In instances where
existing fencing is in reasonably good
condition, the addition of one to sev-
eral charged wires can significantly
enhance the predator-deterring ability
of the fence and its effectiveness for
controlling livestock (Fig. 5). A
charged trip wire placed 6 to 8 inches
(15 to 230 cm) above the ground about
8 to 10 inches (20 to 25 cm) outside the
fence is often effective in preventing
coyotes from digging and crawling un-
der. This single addition to an existing
fence is often the most effective and
economical way to fortify a fence
against coyote passage.
If coyotes are climbing or jumping a
fence, charged wires can be added to
the top and at various intervals. These
wires should be offset outside the
fence. Fencing companies offer offset
brackets to make installation relatively
simple. The number of additional
wires depends on the design of the
original fence and the predicted habits
of the predators.
Portable Electric Fencing. The
advent of safe, high-energy chargers
has led to the development of a variety
of portable electric fences. Most are
constructed with thin strands of wire
running through polyethylene twine or
ribbon, commonly called polywire or
polytape. The polywire is available in
single and multiple wire rolls or as
mesh fencing of various heights. It can
be quickly and easily installed to serve
Fig. 5. Existing woven-wire livestock fence modified with electrified wire.
Outrigger post
with four wires
Fig. 4. High-tensile, electric, antipredator fence.
Fiberglass
stays
Fiberglass
line post
Fiberglass
line post
4"
4"
4"
4"
8"
8"
8"
8"
8"
8"
8"
8"
Charged wire
Ground wire
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
6'
66'
22'
11'
Ground
level
Fiberglass
stay
Trip wire
8"
6"
Note:
Drawing not to scale


C-57
as a temporary corral or to partition
off pastures for controlled grazing.
Perhaps the biggest advantage of port-
able electric fencing is the ability to set
up temporary pens to hold livestock at
night or during other predator control
activities. Portable fencing increases
livestock management options to
avoid places or periods of high preda-
tion risk. Range sheep that are not
accustomed to being fenced, however,
may be difficult to contain in a port-
able fence.
Fencing and Predation Manage-
ment. The success of various types of
fencing in keeping out predators has
ranged from poor to excellent. Density
and behavior of coyotes, terrain and
vegetative conditions, availability of
prey, size of pastures, season of the
year, design of the fence, quality of
construction, maintenance, and other
factors all interplay in determining
how effective a fence will be. Fencing
is most likely to be cost-effective where
the potential for predation is high,
where there is potential for a high
stocking rate, or where electric modifi-
cation of existing fences can be used.
Fencing can be effective when incorpo-
rated with other means of predation
control. For example, combined use of
guarding dogs and fencing has
achieved a greater degree of success
than either method used alone. An
electric fence may help keep a guard-
ing dog in and coyotes out of a pas-
ture. If an occasional coyote does pass
through a fence, the guarding dog can
keep it away from the livestock and
alert the producer by barking.
Fencing can also be used to concen-
trate predator activity at specific places
such as gateways, ravines, or other
areas where the animals try to gain
access. Traps and snares can often be
set at strategic places along a fence to
effectively capture predators. Smaller
pastures are easier to keep free from
predators than larger ones encompass-
ing several square miles (km2).
Fencing is one of the most beneficial
investments in predator damage con-
trol and livestock management where
practical factors warrant its use.
As a final note, fences can pose prob-
lems for wildlife. Barrier fences in par-
ticular exclude not only predators, but
also many other wildlife species. This
fact should be considered where fenc-
ing intersects migration corridors for
wildlife. Ungulates such as deer may
attempt to jump fences, and they occa-
sionally become entangled in the top
wires.
Cultural Methods and Habitat
Modification
At the present time, there are no docu-
mented differences in the vulnerability
of various breeds of sheep to coyote or
dog predation because there has been
very little research in this area. Gener-
ally, breeds with stronger flocking
behaviors are less vulnerable to preda-
tors.
A possible cause of increased coyote
predation to beef cattle calves is the
increased use of cattle dogs in herding.
Cows herded by dogs may not be as
willing to defend newborn calves from
coyotes as those not accustomed to
herding dogs.
Flock or Herd Health. Healthy
sheep flocks and cow/calf herds have
higher reproductive rates and lower
overall death losses. Coyotes often
prey on smaller lambs. Poor nutrition
means weaker or smaller young, with
a resultant increased potential for pre-
dation. Ewes or cows in good condi-
tion through proper nutrition will raise
stronger young that may be less vul-
nerable to coyote predation.
Record Keeping. Good record-
keeping and animal identification sys-
tems are invaluable in a livestock
operation for several reasons. From the
standpoint of coyote predation,
records help producers identify loss
patterns or trends to provide baseline
data that will help determine what
type and amount of coyote damage
control is economically feasible.
Records also aid in identifying critical
problem areas that may require atten-
tion. They may show, for example, that
losses to coyotes are high in a particu-
lar pasture in early summer, thus high-
lighting the need for preventive
control in that area.
Counting sheep and calves regularly is
important in large pastures or areas
with heavy cover where dead livestock
could remain unnoticed. It is not
unusual for producers who do not
regularly count their sheep to suffer
fairly substantial losses before they
realize there is a problem. Determining
with certainty whether losses were due
to coyotes or to other causes may
become impossible.
Season and Location of Lambing
or Calving. Both season and location
of lambing and calving can signifi-
cantly affect the severity of coyote pre-
dation on sheep or calves. The highest
predation losses of sheep and calves
typically occur from late spring
through September due to the food
requirements of coyote pups. In the
Midwest and East, some lambing or
calving occurs between October and
December, whereas in most of the
western states lambing or calving
occurs between February and May. By
changing to a fall lambing or calving
program, some livestock producers
have not only been able to diversify
their marketing program, but have
also avoided having a large number of
young animals on hand during periods
when coyote predation losses are typi-
cally highest.
Shortening lambing and calving peri-
ods by using synchronized or group
breeding may reduce predation by
producing a uniform lamb or calf crop,
thus reducing exposure of small live-
stock to predation. Extra labor and
facilities may be necessary, however,
when birthing within a concentrated
period. Some producers practice early
weaning and do not allow young to go
to large pastures, thus reducing the
chance of coyote losses. This also gives
orphaned and weak young a greater
chance to survive.
The average beef cattle calf production
is about 78% nationwide. First-calf
heifers need human assistance to give
birth to a healthy calf about 40% of the
time. Cow/calf producers who aver-
age 90% to 95% calf crops generally
check their first-calf heifers every 2
hours during calving. Also, most good
producers place first-calf heifers in


C-58
small pastures (less than 160 acres [64
ha]). When all cows are bred to pro-
duce calves in a short, discreet (e.g.
60-day) period, production typically
increases and predation losses
decrease. The birth weight of calves
born to first-calf heifers can be de-
creased by using calving-ease bulls,
thus reducing birthing complications
that often lead to coyote predation.
Producers who use lambing sheds or
pens for raising sheep and small pas-
tures or paddocks for raising cattle
have lower predation losses than those
who lamb or calve in large pastures or
on open range. The more human pres-
ence around sheep, the lower the pre-
dation losses. Confining sheep entirely
to buildings virtually eliminates preda-
tion losses.
Corrals. Although predation can
occur at any time, coyotes tend to kill
sheep at night. Confining sheep at
night is one of the most effective
means of reducing losses to predation.
Nevertheless, some coyotes and many
dogs are bold enough to enter corrals
and kill sheep. A “coyote-proof” corral
is a wise investment. Coyotes are more
likely to attack sheep in unlighted cor-
rals than in corrals with lights. Even if
the corral fence is not coyote-proof, the
mere fact that the sheep are confined
reduces the risk of predation. Penning
sheep at night and turning them out at
mid-morning might reduce losses. In
addition, coyotes tend to be more
active and kill more sheep on foggy or
rainy days than on sunny days. Keep-
ing the sheep penned on foggy or rainy
days may be helpful.
Aside from the benefits of livestock
confinement, there are some problems
associated it. Costs of labor and mate-
rials associated with building corrals,
herding livestock, and feeding live-
stock must be considered. In addition,
the likelihood of increased parasite
and disease problems may inhibit
adoption of confinement as a method
of reducing damage.
Carrion Removal. Removal and
proper disposal of dead sheep and
cattle are important since livestock car-
casses tend to attract coyotes,
habituating them to feed on livestock.
Some producers reason that coyotes
are less likely to kill livestock if there is
carrion available. This may be a valid
preventative measure if an adequate
supply of carrion can be maintained
far away from livestock. If a coyote
becomes habituated to a diet of live-
stock remains, however, it may turn to
killing livestock in the absence of car-
casses. Wherever there is easily acces-
sible carrion, coyotes seem to gather
and predation losses are higher. Con-
versely, where carrion is generally not
available, losses are lower. A study in
Canada showed that the removal of
livestock carcasses significantly
reduced overwinter coyote popula-
tions and shifted coyote distributions
out of livestock areas.
Habitat Changes. Habitat features
change in some areas, depending on
seasonal crop growth. Some cultivated
fields are devoid of coyotes during
winter but provide cover during the
growing season, and a corresponding
increase in predation on nearby live-
stock may occur.
The creation of nearly 40 million acres
(16 million ha) of Conservation
Reserve Program (CRP) acres may
benefit many species of wildlife,
including predators. These acres har-
bor prey for coyotes and foxes, and an
increase in predator populations can
reasonably be predicted. Clearing
away weeds and brush from CRP
areas may reduce predation problems
since predators usually use cover in
their approach to livestock. Generally,
the more open the area where live-
stock are kept, the less likely that
coyote losses will occur. Often junk
piles are located near farmsteads.
These serve as good habitat for rabbits
and other prey and may bring coyotes
into close proximity with livestock,
increasing the likelihood for opportu-
nistic coyotes to prey on available live-
stock. Removing junk piles may be a
good management practice.
Pasture Selection. If sheep or beef
cattle are not lambed or calved in
sheds or lots, the choice of birthing
pastures should be made with poten-
tial coyote predation problems in
mind. Lambs and calves in remote or
rugged pastures are usually more vul-
nerable to coyote predation than those
in closer, more open, and smaller pas-
tures. In general, a relatively small,
open, tightly fenced pasture that can
be kept under close surveillance is a
good choice for birthing livestock that
are likely targets of coyotes. Past expe-
rience with predators as well as
weather and disease considerations
should also serve as guides in the
selection of birthing pastures.
A factor not completely understood is
that, at times, coyotes and other preda-
tors will kill in one pasture and not in
another. Therefore, changing pastures
during times of loss may reduce pre-
dation. There may seem to be a rela-
tionship between size of pasture and
predator losses, with higher loss rates
reported in larger pastures. In reality,
loss rates may not be related as much
to pasture size as to other local condi-
tions such as slope, terrain, and human
populations. Hilly or rugged areas are
typically sparsely populated by hu-
mans and are characterized by large
pastures. These conditions are ideal for
coyotes.
Sheep pastures that contain or are
adjacent to streams, creeks, and rivers
tend to have more coyote problems
than pastures without such features.
Water courses serve as hunting and
travel lanes for coyotes.
Herders. Using herders with sheep or
cattle in large pastures can help reduce
predation, but there has been a trend
away from herders in recent years
because of increasing costs and a
shortage of competent help. Neverthe-
less, tended flocks or herds receive
closer attention than untended live-
stock, particularly in large pastures,
and problems can be solved before
they become serious. We recommend
two herders per band of range sheep.
If herders aren’t used, daily or periodic
checking of the livestock is a good hus-
bandry practice.
Frightening Devices and
Repellents
Frightening devices are useful for
reducing losses during short periods
or until predators are removed. The
devices should not be used for long


C-59
periods of time when predation is not
a problem. To avoid acclimation you
can increase both the degree and dura-
tion of effectiveness by varying the
position, appearance, duration, or fre-
quency of the frightening stimuli, or
using them in various combinations.
Many frightening methods have been
ridiculed in one way or another; never-
theless, all of the techniques discussed
here have helped producers by saving
livestock and/or buying some time to
institute other controls.
Lights. A study involving 100 Kansas
sheep producers showed that using
lights above corrals at night had the
most marked effect on losses to coy-
otes of all the devices examined. Out
of 79 sheep killed by coyotes in corrals,
only three were killed in corrals with
lights. Nearly 40% of the producers in
the study used lights over corrals.
There was some indication in the
study that sheep losses to dogs were
higher in lighted corrals, but the
sample size for dog losses was small
and the results inconclusive. Most of
the producers (80%) used mercury
vapor lights that automatically turned
on at dusk and off at dawn.
Another advantage of lighted corrals is
that coyotes are more vulnerable when
they enter the lighted area. Coyotes
often establish a fairly predictable pat-
tern of killing. When this happens in a
lighted corral, it is possible for a pro-
ducer to wait above or downwind of
the corral and to shoot the coyote as it
enters. Red or blue lights may make
the ambush more successful since coy-
otes appear to be less frightened by
them than by white lights.
Revolving or flashing the lights may
enhance their effectiveness in frighten-
ing away predators. There is some
speculation that the old oil lamps used
in highway construction repelled
coyotes, presumably because of their
flickering effect.
Bells and Radios. Some sheep pro-
ducers place bells on some or all of
their sheep to discourage predators.
Where effects have been measured,
however, no difference in losses was
detected.
Some producers use a radio tuned to
an all-night station to temporarily
deter coyotes, dogs, and other preda-
tors.
Vehicles. Parking cars or pickups in
the area where losses are occurring of-
ten reduces predation temporarily.
Effectiveness can be improved or
extended by frequently moving the
vehicle to a new location. Some pro-
ducers place a replica of a person in
the vehicle when losses are occurring
in the daylight. If predators continue
to kill with vehicles in place, the
vehicle serves as a comfortable blind in
which to wait and shoot offending
predators.
Propane Exploders. Propane
exploders produce loud explosions at
timed intervals when a spark ignites a
measured amount of propane gas. On
most models, the time between explo-
sions can vary from about 1 minute to
15 minutes. Their effectiveness at
frightening coyotes is usually only
temporary, but it can be increased by
moving exploders to different loca-
tions and by varying the intervals be-
tween explosions. In general, the timer
on the exploder should be set to fire
every 8 to 10 minutes, and the location
should be changed every 3 or 4 days.
In cattle pastures, these devices should
be placed on rigid stands above the
livestock. Normally, the exploder
should be turned on just before dark
and off at daybreak, unless coyotes are
killing livestock during daylight hours.
Motion sensors are now available and
likely improve their effectiveness,
though it is still only temporary.
Exploders are best used to reduce
losses until more permanent control or
preventive measures can be imple-
mented. In about 24 coyote depreda-
tion complaints over a 2-year period in
North Dakota, propane exploders
were judged to be successful in stop-
ping or reducing predation losses until
offending coyotes could be removed.
“Success time” of the exploders ap-
pears to depend a great deal on how
well they are tended by the livestock
producer.
Strobe Lights and Sirens. The
USDA’s Denver Wildlife Research
Fig. 6. Electronic Guard frightening device
Center developed a frightening device
called the Electronic Guard (EG) (Fig.
6). The EG consists of a strobe light
and siren controlled by a variable
interval timer that is activated at night
with a photoelectric cell. In tests con-
ducted in fenced pastures, predation
was reduced by about 89%. The device
is used in Kansas and other states to
protect cows/calves from coyote pre-
dation. Most research on the effective-
ness of this device, however, has been
done on sheep operations. Suggestions
for using the unit differ for pastured
sheep and range operations.
To use the EG in fenced pastures (farm
flocks):
1. Place EGs above the ground on
fence posts, trees, or T-posts so they
can be heard and seen at greater
distances and to prevent livestock
from damaging them.
2. Position EGs so that rain water can-
not enter them and cause a malfunc-
tion.
3. Locate EGs so that light can enter
the photocell port or window. If
positioned in deep shade, they may
not turn on or off at the desired
times.
4. The number of EGs used to protect
sheep in fenced pastures depends
on pasture size, terrain features, and
the amount and height of vegetation
in or around the pasture. In general,
at least two units should be used in
small (20 to 30 acres [8 to 12 ha]),
level, short-grass pastures. Three to
four units should be used in larger
(40 to 100 acres [16 to 40 ha]), hilly,
tall grass, or wooded pastures.


C-60
5. Don’t use EGs in pastures larger
than about 100 acres (40 ha) because
their effective range is limited. The
device could be useful in larger pas-
tures when placed near areas where
sheep congregate and bed at night.
6. EGs should be placed on high spots,
where kills have been found, at the
edge of wooded areas, near or on
bedgrounds, or near suspected
coyote travelways. They should be
moved to different locations every
10 to 14 days to reduce the likeli-
hood of coyotes getting used to
them.
To use the EG in open range (herded
or range sheep):
1. The number of EGs used will
depend on the number of sheep in
the band and the size of the
bedground. Four units should be
used to protect bands of 1,000 ewes
and their lambs.
2. When possible, place one EG in the
center of the bedground and the
other three around the edge of the
bedground. Try to place the units
on coyote travelways.
3. EGs should be placed on high
points, ridge tops, edges of clear-
ings, or on high rocks or
outcroppings. Hang the devices on
tree limbs 5 to 7 feet (1.5 to 2.1 m)
above ground level. If used above
timberline or in treeless areas, hang
them from a tripod of poles.
4. Herders who bed their sheep tightly
will have better results than those
who allow sheep to bed over large
areas. Sheep that are bedded about
200 yards (166 m) or less in diam-
eter, or are spread out not more
than 200 to 400 yards (166 to 332 m)
along a ridge top, can usually be
protected with EGs.
Repellents. The notion of repelling
coyotes from sheep or calves is
appealing, and during the 1970s, uni-
versity and government researchers
tested a wide variety of potentially re-
pellent chemical compounds on sheep.
Both olfactory (smell) and gustatory
(taste) repellents were examined. The
underlying objective was to find a
compound that, when applied to
sheep, would prevent coyotes from
killing them. Tests were conducted
with various prey species including
rabbits, chickens, and sheep. Some
repellents were applied by dipping tar-
get animals in them, others were
sprayed on, and some were applied in
neck collars or ear tags.
Coyotes rely heavily on visual cues
while stalking, chasing, and killing
their prey. Taste and smell are of lesser
importance in actually making the kill.
These factors may in part account for
the fact that the repellent compounds
were not able to consistently prevent
coyotes from killing, although some of
the repellents were obviously offensive
to coyotes and prevented them from
consuming the killed prey. Several
compounds were tested on sheep
under field conditions, but none
appeared to offer significant, pro-
longed protection.
If an effective chemical repellent were
to be found, the obstacles in bringing it
to industry use would be significant.
The compound would not only need
to be effective, but also persistent
enough to withstand weathering while
posing no undue risk to the sheep,
other animals, or the environment. It
would also have to withstand the rig-
orous Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) approval process.
High-frequency sound has also been
tested as a repellent for coyotes, but
the results were no more encouraging
than for chemical repellents. Coyotes,
like dogs, responded to particular
sound frequencies and showed some
aversion to sounds broadcast within
one foot (30 cm) of their ear. Research-
ers, however, were unable to broad-
cast the sound a sufficient distance to
test the effects under field conditions.
Aversive Conditioning. The objec-
tive of aversive conditioning is to feed
a coyote a preylike bait laced with an
aversive agent that causes the coyote
to become ill, resulting in subsequent
avoidance of the prey. Most of the
research on this technique has
involved the use of lithium chloride, a
salt, as the aversive agent.
Aversive conditioning is well docu-
mented for averting rodents from food
sources, but significant problems must
be overcome before the method can be
used to reduce coyote predation on
sheep. Coyotes must be induced to eat
sheeplike baits that have been treated
with the aversive chemical. The chemi-
cal must cause sufficient discomfort,
such as vomiting, to cause coyotes to
avoid other baits. Furthermore, the
avoidance must be transferred to live
sheep and must persist long enough
without reinforcement for the method
to offer realistic protection to sheep.
To date, pen and field tests with
aversive conditioning have yielded
conflicting and inconclusive results. It
does not appear that aversive condi-
tioning is effective in reducing preda-
tion, but additional field tests would
be useful.
Guarding Animals.
Livestock Guarding Dogs. A live-
stock guarding dog is one that gener-
ally stays with sheep or cattle without
harming them and aggressively repels
predators. Its protective behaviors are
largely instinctive, but proper rearing
plays a part. Breeds most commonly
used today include the Great Pyrenees,
Komondor, Anatolian Shepherd, and
Akbash Dog (Fig. 7). Other Old World
breeds used to a lesser degree include
Maremma, Sharplaninetz, and Kuvasz.
Crossbreeds are also used.
The characteristics of each sheep
operation will dictate the number of
dogs required for effective protection
from predators. If predators are scarce,
one dog is sufficient for most fenced
pasture operations. Range operations
often use two dogs per band of sheep.
The performance of individual dogs
will differ based on age and experi-
ence. The size, topography, and habitat
of the pasture or range must also be
considered. Relatively flat, open areas
can be adequately covered by one dog.
When brush, timber, ravines, and hills
are in the pasture, several dogs may be
required, particularly if the sheep are
scattered. Sheep that flock and form a
cohesive unit, especially at night, can
be protected by one dog more effec-
tively than sheep that are continually


C-61
scattered and bedded in a number of
locations.
The goal with a new puppy is to chan-
nel its natural instincts to produce a
mature guardian dog with the desired
characteristics. This is best accom-
plished by early and continued asso-
ciation with sheep to produce a bond
between the dog and sheep. The opti-
mum time to acquire a pup is between
7 and 8 weeks of age. The pup should
be separated from litter mates and
placed with sheep, preferably lambs,
in a pen or corral from which it can’t
escape. This socialization period
should continue with daily checks
from the producer until the pup is
about 16 weeks old. Daily checks don’t
necessarily include petting the pup.
The primary bond should be between
the dog and the sheep, not between the
dog and humans. The owner, how-
ever, should be able to catch and han-
dle the dog to administer health care
or to manage the livestock. At about 4
months, the pup can be released into a
larger pasture to mingle with the other
sheep.
A guarding dog will likely include
peripheral areas in its patrolling. Some
have been known to chase vehicles
and wildlife and threaten children and
cyclists. These activities should be dis-
couraged. Neighbors should be alerted
to the possibility that the dog may
roam onto their property and that
some predator control devices such as
traps, snares, and M-44s present a
danger to it. Many counties enforce
stringent laws regarding owner
responsibility for damage done by
roaming dogs. It is in the best interests
of the owner, dog, and community to
train the dog to stay in its designated
area.
The use of guarding dogs does not
eliminate the need for other predation
control actions. They should, however,
be compatible with the dog’s behavior.
Toxicants (including some insecticides
and rodenticides) used to control vari-
ous pest species can be extremely haz-
ardous to dogs and are therefore not
compatible with the use of guarding
dogs.
The M-44 is particularly hazardous to
dogs. Some people have successfully
trained their dogs to avoid M-44s by
allowing the dog to set off an M-44
filled with pepper or by rigging the
device to a rat trap. The unpleasant
experience may teach the dog to avoid
M-44s, but the method is not fool-
proof—one error by the dog, and the
result is usually fatal. With the excep-
tion of toxic collars, which are not legal
in all states, toxicants should not be
used in areas where guarding dogs are
working unless the dog is chained or
confined while the control takes place.
Dogs caught in a steel trap set for
predators are rarely injured seriously if
they are found and released within a
reasonable period of time. If snares
and traps are used where dogs are
working, the producer should: (1)
encourage the use of sets and devices
that are likely not to injure the dog if it
is caught, and (2) know where traps
and snares are set so they can be
checked if a dog is missing. Aerial
hunting, as well as calling and shoot-
ing coyotes, should pose no threat to
guarding dogs. Ensuring the safety of
the dog is largely the producer’s
responsibility.
Dogs may be viewed as a first line of
defense against predation in sheep and
cow/calf operations in some cases.
Their effectiveness can be enhanced by
good livestock management and by
eliminating predators with suitable
removal techniques.
Donkeys. Although the research has
not focused on donkeys as it has on
guarding dogs, they are gaining in
popularity as protectors of sheep and
goat flocks in the United States. A
recent survey showed that in Texas
alone, over 2,400 of the 11,000 sheep
and goat producers had used donkeys
as guardians.
The terms donkey and burro are syn-
onymous (the Spanish translation of
donkey is burro) and are used inter-
changeably. Donkeys are generally
docile to people, but they seem to
have an inherent dislike of dogs and
other canids, including coyotes and
foxes. The typical response of a don-
key to an intruding canid may include
braying, bared teeth, a running attack,
kicking, and biting. Most likely it is
acting out of aggression toward the
intruder rather than to protect the
sheep. There is little information on a
donkey’s effectiveness with noncanid
predators such as bears, mountain
lions, bobcats, or birds of prey.
Reported success of donkeys in reduc-
ing predation is highly variable.
Improper husbandry or rearing prac-
tices and unrealistic expectations
Fig. 7. Livestock guarding dog (Akbash dog)


C-62
probably account for many failures.
Donkeys are significantly cheaper to
obtain and care for than guarding
dogs, and they are probably less prone
to accidental death and premature
mortality than dogs. They may pro-
vide a longer period of useful life than
a guarding dog, and they can be used
with relative safety in conjunction with
snares, traps, M-44s, and toxic collars.
Researchers and livestock producers
have identified several key points to
consider when using a donkey for pre-
dation control:
1. Use only a jenny or a gelded jack.
Intact jacks are too aggressive and
may injure livestock. Some jennies
and geldings may also injure live-
stock. Select donkeys from
medium-sized stock.
2. Use only one donkey per group of
sheep. The exception may be a
jenny with a foal. When two or
more adult donkeys are together or
with a horse, they usually stay
together, not necessarily near the
sheep. Also avoid using donkeys in
adjacent pastures since they may
socialize across the fence and ignore
the sheep.
3. Allow about 4 to 6 weeks for a
naive donkey to bond to the sheep.
Stronger bonding may occur when
a donkey is raised from birth with
sheep.
4. Avoid feeds or supplements con-
taining monensin or lasolacid. They
are poisonous to donkeys.
5. Remove the donkey during lamb-
ing, particularly if lambing in con-
finement, to avoid injuries to lambs
or disruption of the lamb-ewe bond.
6. Test a new donkey’s response to
canids by challenging it with a dog
in a pen or small pasture. Discard
donkeys that don’t show overt
aggression to an intruding dog.
7. Use donkeys in smaller (less than
600 acres [240 ha]), relatively open
pastures with not more than 200 to
300 head of livestock. Large pas-
tures with rough terrain and vegeta-
tion and widely scattered livestock
lessen the effectiveness of a donkey.
Llamas. Like donkeys, llamas have an
inherent dislike of canids, and a grow-
ing number of livestock producers are
successfully using llamas to protect
their sheep. A recent study of 145
ranches where guard llamas were used
to protect sheep revealed that average
losses of sheep to predators decreased
from 26 to 8 per year after llamas were
employed. Eighty percent of the
ranchers surveyed were “very satis-
fied” or “satisfied” with their llamas.
Llamas reportedly bond with sheep
within hours and offer advantages
over guarding dogs similar to those
described for donkeys.
Other Animals. USDA’s Agricultural
Research Service tested the bonding of
sheep to cattle as a method of protect-
ing sheep from coyote predation.
There was clearly some protection
afforded the sheep that remained near
cattle. Whether this protection resulted
from direct action by the cattle or by
the coyotes’ response to a novel stimu-
lus is uncertain. Later studies with
goats, sheep, and cattle confirmed that
when either goats or sheep remained
near cattle, they were protected from
predation by coyotes. Conversely,
goats or sheep that grazed apart from
cattle, even those that were bonded,
were readily preyed on by coyotes.
There are currently no research data
available on the ideal ratio of cattle to
sheep, the breeds of cattle, age of cattle
most likely to be used successfully, or
on the size of bonded groups to obtain
maximum protection from predation.
Multispecies grazing offers many
advantages for optimum utilization of
forage, and though additional study
and experience is needed, it may also
be a tool for coyote damage control.
Any animal that displays aggressive
behavior toward intruding coyotes
may offer some benefit in deterring
predation. Other types of animals
reportedly used for predation control
include goats, mules, and ostriches.
Coyotes in particular are suspicious of
novel stimuli. This behavior is most
likely the primary reason that many
frightening tactics show at least tem-
porary effectiveness.
Toxicants
Pesticides have historically been an
important component in an integrated
approach to controlling coyote dam-
age, but their use is extremely
restricted today by federal and state
laws. All pesticides used in the United
States must be registered with the EPA
under the provisions of FIFRA and
must be used in accordance with label
directions. Increasingly restrictive
regulations implemented by EPA
under the authority of FIFRA, the
National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA), presidential order, and the
Endangered Species Act have resulted
in the near elimination of toxicants
legally available for predator damage
control.
The only toxicants currently registered
for mammalian predator damage con-
trol are sodium cyanide, used in the
M-44 ejector device, and Compound
1080 (sodium monofluoroacetate), for
use in the livestock protection collar.
These toxicants are Restricted Use Pes-
ticides and may be used only by certi-
fied pesticide applicators. Information
on registration status and availability
of these products in individual states
may be obtained from the respective
state’s department of agriculture.
Sodium Cyanide in the M-44. The
M-44 is a spring-activated device used
to expel sodium cyanide into an
animal’s mouth. It is currently regis-
tered by EPA for use by trained per-
sonnel in the control of depredating
coyotes, foxes, and dogs.
The M-44 consists of a capsule holder
wrapped in an absorbent material, an
ejector mechanism, a capsule contain-
ing approximately 0.9 grams of a pow-
dered sodium cyanide mixture, and a
5- to 7-inch (15- to 18-cm) hollow stake
(Fig. 8). For most effective use, set
M-44s in locations similar to those for
good trap sets. Drive the hollow stake
into the ground. Cock the ejector unit
and secure it in the stake. Screw the
wrapped capsule holder containing the
cyanide capsule onto the ejector unit,
and apply fetid meat bait to the cap-
sule holder. Coyotes attracted by the
bait will try to bite the baited capsule
holder. When the M-44 is pulled, the


C-63
their ability to remain effective during
rain, snow, and freezing conditions.
While M-44s can be used effectively as
part of an integrated damage control
program, they do have several disad-
vantages. Because canids are less
responsive to food-type baits during
warm weather when natural foods are
usually abundant, M-44s are not as
effective during warmer months as
they are in cooler weather. M-44s are
subject to a variety of mechanical mal-
functions, but these problems can be
minimized if a regular maintenance
schedule is followed. A further disad-
vantage is the tendency for the cyanide
in the capsules to absorb moisture over
time and to cake, becoming ineffective.
Maximum effectiveness of M-44s is
hampered by the requirement to fol-
low 26 use restrictions established by
the EPA in the interest of human and
environmental safety. The M-44 is not
registered for use in all states, and in
those where it is registered, the state
may impose additional use restric-
tions. A formal training program is
required before use of M-44s. Some
states allow its use only by federal
ADC specialists, whereas other states
may allow M-44s to be used by trained
and certified livestock producers.
1080 Livestock Protection Collar.
The livestock protection collar (LP
collar or toxic collar) is a relatively
new tool used to selectively kill
coyotes that attack sheep or goats.
Collars are placed on sheep or goats
that are pastured where coyotes are
likely to attack. Each collar contains a
small quantity (300 mg) of Compound
1080 solution. The collars do not
attract coyotes, but because of their
design and position on the throat,
most attacking coyotes will puncture
the collar and ingest a lethal amount of
the toxicant. Unlike sodium cyanide,
1080 is slow-acting, and a coyote
ingesting the toxicant will not exhibit
symptoms or die for several hours. As
a result, sheep or goats that are
attacked are usually killed. The collar
is registered only for use against
coyotes and may be placed only on
sheep or goats.
The LP collar must be used in conjunc-
tion with specific sheep and goat hus-
bandry practices to be most effective.
Coyote attacks must be directed or tar-
geted at collared livestock. This may
be accomplished by temporarily plac-
ing a “target” flock of perhaps 20 to 50
collared lambs or kids and their
uncollared mothers in a pasture where
coyote predation is likely to occur,
while removing other sheep or goats
from that vicinity. In situations where
LP collars have been used and found
ineffective, the common cause of fail-
ure has been poor or ineffective target-
ing. It is difficult to ensure effective
targeting if depredations are occurring
infrequently. In most instances, only a
high and regular frequency of depre-
dations will justify spending the time,
effort, and money necessary to become
trained and certified, purchase collars,
and use them properly.
The outstanding advantage in using
the LP collar is its selectivity in elimi-
nating individual coyotes that are
responsible for killing livestock. The
collar may also be useful in removing
depredating coyotes that have eluded
other means of control. Disadvantages
include the cost of collars (approxi-
mately $20 each) and livestock that
must be sacrificed, more intensive
management practices, and the costs
and inconvenience of complying with
use restrictions, including require-
ments for training, certification, and
record keeping. One use restriction
limits the collars to use in fenced pas-
tures only. They cannot be used to pro-
tect sheep on open range. Also, collars
are not widely available, because they
are registered for use in only a few
states.
Fumigants
Carbon monoxide is an effective bur-
row fumigant recently re-registered by
the EPA. Gas cartridges, which contain
65% sodium nitrate and 35% charcoal,
produce carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, and other noxious gases when
ignited. They were registered by the
EPA in 1981 for control of coyotes in
dens only. This is the only fumigant
currently registered for this purpose.
Fig. 8. The M-44 device consists of the (a) base,
(b) ejector, (c) capsule holder, and (d) cyanide-
containing plastic capsule.
a
b
c
d
spring-activated plunger propels
sodium cyanide into the animal’s
mouth, resulting in death within a few
seconds.
The M-44 is very selective for canids
because of the attractants used and the
unique requirement that the device be
triggered by pulling on it. While the
use of traps or snares may present a
hazard to livestock, M-44s can be used
with relative safety in pastures where
livestock are present. Although not
recommended, they can also be used
in the presence of livestock guarding
dogs if the dogs are first successfully
conditioned to avoid the devices. This
can be done by allowing them to pull
an M-44 loaded with pepper. An addi-
tional advantage of M-44s over traps is


C-64
Trapping
There are many effective methods for
trapping coyotes, and success can be
enhanced by considering several key
points. Coyotes learn from past events
that were unpleasant or frightening,
and they often avoid such events in the
future. In spring and summer, most
coyotes limit their movements to a
small area, but in late summer, fall,
and winter they may roam over a
larger area. Coyotes follow regular
paths and crossways, and they prefer
high hills or knolls from which they
can view the terrain. They establish
regular scent posts along their paths,
and they depend on their ears, nose,
and eyes to sense danger.
The following describes one method of
trapping that has proven effective for
many beginners.
Items Needed to Set a Coyote Trap:
1.
One 5-gallon (19-l) plastic bucket
to carry equipment.
2.
Two No. 3 or No. 4 traps per set.
3. One 18- to 24-inch (46- to 61-cm)
stake for holding both traps in
place.
4.
Straight claw hammer to dig a
hole in the ground for trap place-
ment and to pound the stake into
the ground.
5.
Leather gloves to protect fingers
while digging the trap bed.
6.
Cloth (or canvas) feed sack to
kneel on while digging a trap bed
and pounding the stake.
7.
Roll of plastic sandwich bags to
cover and prevent soil from get-
ting under the pan of the trap.
8.
Screen sifter for sifting soil over
the traps.
9.
Rib bone for leveling off soil over
the traps once they are set in place
and covered.
10. Bottle of coyote urine to attract the
coyote to the set (keep urine away
from other equipment).
Locating the Set. Coyotes travel where
walking is easy, such as along old roads,
and they have preferred places to travel,
hunt, rest, howl, and roam. Do not set
traps directly in a trail but to one side
where coyotes may stop, such as on a
hilltop, near a gate, or where cover
changes. Make the set on level ground to
ensure that the coyote walks across level
ground to it.
Good locations for a set are often indi-
cated by coyote tracks. The following
are good locations on most farms and
ranches for setting traps: high hills and
saddles in high hills; near isolated land
features or isolated bales of hay; trail
junctions, fences, and stream crossings;
pasture roads, livestock trails, water-
ways, game trails, and dry or shallow
creek beds; near pond dams, field bor-
ders, field corners, groves of trees, and
eroded gullies; sites near animal car-
casses, bone or brush piles; and under
rim rocks.
Making the Set. Place three to five
trap sets near the area where coyotes
have killed livestock.
1. First, observe the area where the
losses are occurring and look for
tracks and droppings to determine
the species responsible. Study the
paths used by predators. If you
have 4 hours to spend setting traps,
spend at least 3 of them looking for
coyote sign.
2. Decide where to place the trap sets.
Always place them in an open, flat
area because of wind currents, dis-
persion of scent, and visibility. Never
place traps uphill or downhill from
the coyote’s expected path of
approach. Look for open places where
coyote tracks indicate that the animal
milled around or stopped.
3. Place the set upwind from the path (or
site of coyote activity) so the prevail-
ing wind will carry the scent across
the area of expected coyote activity.
4. Choose a level spot as close as pos-
sible to, but not directly on, the coyote’s
path. The coyote’s approach should
never be over dry leaves, tall grass,
stones, sticks, weeds, or rough ground.
Make each set where the coyote has
clear visibility as it approaches.
5. Place the set using two No. 3 traps
with a cold-shut chain repair link
affixed to the top of a steel stake. The
link should swivel around the stake
top. The stake should be at least 18
inches (46 cm) long, or longer if the
soil is loose. Use two stakes set at an
angle to each other if the soil will not
hold with a single stake.
Figures 9 through 29 illustrate the pro-
cedures for making a set.
Fig. 9. A piece of canvas, about 3 feet x 6 feet, used as a kneeling
cloth, makes preparing the trap site much easier.
Fig. 10. Kneel down on the cloth and outline a trench approximately
3 feet long, 7 inches wide, and 2 inches deep. Dig the trench so that it
runs lengthwise to the prevailing wind.


C-65
Fig. 16. Carefully spread the jaws. Reach under the jaws with your
left hand, holding the pan up while you ease the two springs’
tension so that the trap will remain set.
Fig. 13. Place one of the traps on your left leg just above your knee.
Grasp the trap spring nearest your right leg as shown, and
compress the spring.
Fig 11. Dig out the soil with tools and by hand.
Fig 14. Compress this spring below the jaw hinge, then bend the
spring as shown above.
Fig. 12. Pile the excavated soil from the trench on the kneeling
cloth.
Fig 15. Hold the compressed spring with your right leg as shown
above, then compress the left spring. Hold this spring down with
your left hand.


C-66
Fig. 18. Drive a steel stake into the center of the trench so that the
top of the stake is even with the bottom of the trench. Place one of
the set traps at each end of the trench. Place the trap so it sits
solidly and will not tip if the coyote steps on the spring or jaws.
Fig 21. Stretch the pan cover tightly across the pan and under the
jaws. Pan and jaws should be level and flat. In cold weather,
plastic can be placed under the trap. Place plastic baggies on each
spring and mix table salt with dry soil or peat moss to cover the
trap. Set the other trap as shown above. Place the pan cover so that
the dog or trigger can move upward without binding it in.
Anything that slows the action of the trap can cause a miss or a toe
hold.
Fig. 22. Use a sifter of 1/4-inch hail screen on a wood frame, 7 inches
by 10 inches and 2 inches deep. Sift soil from the canvas kneeling
cloth over the set, covering the entire trench back to ground level
(except directly over the traps).
Fig. 19. Place canvas, plastic, screen, cloth, wax paper, or a similar
material over the pan and under the trap jaws. Be sure the pan sits
level with the trap jaws.
Fig. 17. Twist the springs back toward the trigger. Always set the
trap in the ground so that the animal walks into it over the jaw
that is nearest to the bottom of the trench, as shown above.
Fig 20. Take out or add soil until the trap pan and jaws are about
1/2 inch below the level of the surrounding ground. Build a ridge
for the jaw opposite the trigger to sit on. On the side of the trap
that has the trigger, place soil under the trap pan cover on either
side of the trigger to hold the pan cover up tight against the bottom
of the jaws.


C-67
Fig. 25. Place a tablespoon of coyote urine on the projection. When
smelling the scent and seeing the projection, the coyote will likely
walk directly into the wind and step into a trap as it approaches
the projection. A coyote dropping placed nearby will improve the
set.
Fig. 28. Discard the material removed from the trap site.
Fig. 24. Place an object over the buried stake that can be easily
seen; the further away it can be seen, the better. Use an old, dried
bleached bone, a dried cow chip, a small bush or clump of grass,
an old dried root, a small stake, or a stump. The object should be
about 6 to 8 inches high and be very visible.
Fig. 27. Use the canvas kneeling cloth to carry away all loose soil.
This cloth can also be used to carry soil to the set. In summer it is a
good idea to store fine dry soil for use in winter. You can often
locate dry soil in wet weather under bridges, on cut banks, or in
old sheds.
Fig. 23. The trap should be set about 1/4 inch below the level of
the surrounding ground. The set must look natural. The soil
around the trap and over the springs, chains, and stake should be
packed to the same firmness as the ground the coyote walks on in
its approach to the set. Only soft soil should be directly over the
trap pan within the set jaw area. Use a curved stick, brush, or rib
bone to level soil over the trap.
Fig. 26. Carefully brush out all tracks and signs of activity.


C-68
Always bury the traps and stake in the
ground using dry, finely sifted soil.
One of the most difficult aspects of
using traps is trapping when the
ground is frozen, muddy, wet, or
damp. If the weather is expected to
turn cold and/or wet, you should use
one or a combination of the following
materials in which to set and cover the
traps: Canadian sphagnum peat moss,
very dry soil, dry manure, buckwheat
hulls, or finely chopped hay. A mix-
ture of one part table salt or calcium
chloride with three parts dry soil will
prevent the soil from freezing over the
trap. When using peat moss or other
dry, fluffy material, cover the material
with a thin layer of dry soil mixed with
1/4 teaspoon of table salt. This will
blend the set with the surrounding soil
and prevent the wind from blowing
peat moss away from the trap. As an
alternative, traps could be set in a bed
of dry soil placed over the snow or fro-
zen ground.
Guiding Coyote Footsteps. Use a
few strategically placed dirt clods,
sticks, small rocks, or stickers around
the set to guide the coyote’s foot to the
traps. Coyotes will tend to avoid the
obstacles and place their feet in bare
areas. Do not use this method to the
extent that the set looks unnatural.
Care of Coyote Traps. New traps
can be used to trap coyotes, but better
results may be obtained by using traps
that have been dyed. Dyeing traps
helps prevent rust and removes odors.
Wood chips or crystals for dyeing
traps are available from trapping sup-
ply outlets. Some trappers also wax
their traps to prevent them from rust-
ing and to extend the life of the traps.
Inevitably, rusting will occur when
traps are in use. It does not harm the
traps, but after their continued use the
rust often will slow the action of the
trap and cause it to miss a coyote.
Traps also become contaminated with
skunk musk, gasoline, oil, blood, or
other odors. It is important that traps
be clean and in good working condi-
tion. Rusted traps should be cleaned
with a wire brush to ensure that the
trigger and pan work freely. Check the
chain links for open links. File the trig-
gers and receivers to eliminate all
rounded edges. Make any adjustments
necessary so that the pan will sit level
and the trap perform smoothly.
Size of Traps for Coyotes. There
are many suitable traps for catching
coyotes. Both the No. 3 and No. 4 are
good choices. Many trappers prefer a
No. 3 coilspring round-jawed off-set
trap. It is a good idea to use superweld
kinkless chain. The length of chain var-
ies depending on whether the trap is
staked or a drag is used. A longer
chain should be used with a drag. The
off-set jaws are designed to reduce
broken foot bones, which can allow the
coyote to escape by wriggling out of
the trap. Traps with coil springs are
good coyote traps, but they require
more upkeep than a double long-
spring trap. The type and size of trap
may be regulated in each state. Body
gripping traps are dangerous and ille-
gal in some states for catching coyotes.
When pet dogs might be present, use a
padded-jaw No. 3 double coilspring
trap.
While additional testing needs to be
conducted, results of research to
reduce injury using padded-jaw traps
have been encouraging. In tests with
No. 3 Soft-Catch® coilsprings, No. 3
NM longsprings, and No. 4 Newhouse
longsprings, capture rates for coyotes
were 95%, 100%, and 100%, respec-
tively. Soft-Catch traps caused the
least visible injury to captured coyotes.
Anchoring Traps. Chain swivels are
necessary for trapping coyotes. One
swivel at the stake, one in the middle
of the chain, and one at the trap are
recommended. Drags (Fig. 30) instead
of stakes can be used where there is an
abundance of brush or trees or where
the ground is too rocky to use a stake.
Use a long chain (5 feet [1.5 m] or
more) on a drag.
Lures and Scents. Coyotes are inter-
ested in and may be attracted to odors
in their environment. Commercially
available lures and scents or natural
odors such as fresh coyote, dog, or cat
droppings or urine may produce good
results. Coyote urine works the best.
Problems in Trapping Coyotes.
A great deal of experience is required
to effectively trap coyotes. Trapping by
experienced or untrained people may
serve to educate coyotes, making them
very difficult to catch, even by experi-
enced trappers. Coyotes, however,
exhibit individualized patterns of
behavior. Many, but not all, coyotes
become trap-shy after being caught
and then escaping from a trap. There is
a record of one coyote having been
caught eight times in the same set.
Some coyotes require considerably
more time and thought to trap than
others.  With unlimited time, a person
could trap almost any coyote.
If a coyote digs up or springs a trap
without getting caught, reset the trap
in the same place. Then carefully set
one or two traps near the first set. Use
gloves and be careful to hide the traps.
Changing scents or using various
Fig. 29. Leave the trap area as near to its original condition as
possible. The coyote’s keen sense of sight and smell will quickly
alert it to danger.


C-69
tricks, such as a lone feather as a visual
attraction near a set, or a ticking clock
in a dirt hole set as an audible attrac-
tion, may help in trying to catch wary
coyotes.
Resetting Traps and Checking
Trap Sets. Once a coyote is caught at
a set, reset the trap in the same place.
The odor and disturbance at the set
where a coyote has been caught will
often attract other coyotes. Sometimes
other coyotes will approach but not
enter the circle where the coyote was
caught. If signs indicate that this has
happened, move the trap set outside of
the circle. Leave all sets out for at least
2 weeks before moving the traps to a
new location. Check the traps once
every 24 hours, preferably in the
morning around 9 or 10 o’clock.
Reapply the scent every 4 days, using
8 to 10 drops of coyote urine.
Human Scent and Coyote Trap-
ping. Minimize human scent around
trap sets as much as possible. If traps
Killing a Trapped Coyote. A coyote
will make its most desperate attempt
to get out of the trap as a person
approaches. As soon as you get within
a few feet (m) of the coyote, check to
see that the trap has a firm hold on the
coyote’s foot. If so, shoot the coyote in
the head, with a .22 caliber weapon. It
is often a good idea to reset the trap in
the same place. The blood from the
coyote will not necessarily harm the
set as long as it is not on the trap or on
the soil over the reset traps. Reset the
trap regardless of the species of animal
captured, skunks included.
Draw Stations. Draw stations are
natural areas or places set up inten-
tionally to draw coyotes to a particular
location. For example, the straw and
cleanings from a chicken house can be
placed in an area where coyote tracks
are found. Traps can then be set
around the edges of the straw. Areas
around carcasses or parts of animals,
such as a cow’s head, are good places
to set traps. Wire the carcass to a stake
driven into the ground and out of
sight. Once coyotes start feeding, set
traps 30 to 60 feet (9 to 18 m) upwind
from the carcasses or draw station.
Never set traps very close to carcasses
because nontarget animals such as vul-
tures, eagles, hawks, skunks, and
opossums will be caught. If sheep
graze in an area where traps are set,
cover the traps with a disc blade or
brush during the day and uncover
them at night when the sheep are
penned.
Opposition to Traps. Opposition to
foothold traps is based primarily on
two objections: (1) a lack of selectivity
for the animal which the trap is set for
and (2) foot injury sustained by the
captured animal. Trap pan tension
devices such as sticks, forked twigs,
springs, and sponges placed under the
trap pan have been used for many
years to reduce captures of nontarget
species. Many coyote traps have an
adjustable pan tension screw. One
study evaluated two pan tension
devices. Preliminary results indicated
that the use of either device could
exclude nearly 90% of the gray foxes,
swift foxes, striped skunks, opossums,
and jackrabbits that stepped on traps,
Drag hook with S
link for coyote traps
Mild steel rod
5/16" diameter
8" long
Mild steel rod
7/16" diameter
about 28" long
About 1" weld
on both sides
7"
Points sharpened and
given 1 1/2" offset
twist
1 1/2"
offset
twist
Side
view
are being set in warm months, make
sure the trapper has recently bathed,
has clean clothes, and is not sweating.
Leave no unnecessary foreign odors,
such as cigarette butts or gum wrap-
pers, near the set. Wear clean gloves
and rubber footwear while setting
traps. A landowner may have an
advantage over a stranger who comes
to set traps since the coyotes are
acquainted with the landowner’s scent
and expect him/her to be there.
Coyotes have been known to leave an
area after encountering an unfamiliar
human scent.
Because of human scent, coyotes are
more difficult to catch with traps in
wet or humid weather. Wear gloves,
wax traps, and take other precaution-
ary measures in areas where humans
are not commonly present, where wet
weather conditions are common, and
where coyotes have been trapped for
several years and have learned to
avoid traps.
Fig. 30. Trapping drag
10 1/2"


C-70
as compared with 24% on average for
unequipped traps. A variety of other
species were excluded at even higher
rates. Some coyotes were also
excluded, but because more traps
remained functional, the net result
appeared to be an increase in coyote
trapping efficiency. Advances in trap
design, including off-set jaws and
padded-jaw traps, have increased the
humaneness of foothold traps. Traps
should be checked once or twice each
day to minimize the length of time that
an animal must remain in a trap.
Snares
Snaring is the technique of setting a
steel-cable loop in an animal’s path to
capture it by the neck, body, or leg.
Snares usually consist of a 2.5- to 10-
foot (0.75- to 3.0-m) long piece of
galvanized aircraft cable containing a
slide lock that forms a loop in the cable
(Fig. 31). On short snares, a swivel to
prevent twisting and breaking the
cable is attached to the end of the cable
opposite the loop. On longer snares,
swivels can be located near the middle
of the cable and at one end.
Snares offer several advantages over
steel foothold traps. They are light-
weight, compact, simple in function,
affected little by weather, easy to set,
low in cost, and offer a high degree of
human safety. In a south Texas study,
snares were 10 times more selective
over steel foothold traps for target spe-
cies of coyotes and bobcats. Snares,
however, can be a greater hazard than
traps to livestock. Recent research has
produced deer stops and break-away
or relaxing locks that have significantly
improved snare specificity.
Preparation of Snares. New com-
mercial snares and extension cables
can be cleaned by boiling each dozen
snares in a pan or bucket of water with
4 tablespoons (16 gm) of baking soda
for one hour. The snares will turn a
dull gray after being removed from
this bath and hung up to dry outdoors.
Darken snares by boiling them in
Fig. 34. Fastening the snare to the stake
Cable, NOT
wire, holds
snare to
stake
1/2"
rebar stake
Fig. 33. Setting the snare
Wrap snare around
snare support
U-shaped
snare
support
Bend snare to
prevent wind from
closing it
36" galvanized
No. 9 wire
Notched
driving rod
V bend
prevents
movement
Swivel
Slide
lock
2.5' to 10'
galvanized
aircraft cable
Fig. 31. Coyote snare
Fig. 32. Driving the support wire


C-71
ing. A lead cable that is at least as
strong as the snare cable can be used
to attach short snares to the rebar
stake. Avoid using 9-gauge (0.38-cm)
wire or several strands of 14-gauge
(0.21-cm) wire to anchor snares to a
rebar stake because they may bend
back and forth, crystallize, and break.
When used for coyotes, snares also can
be secured to a dead tree limb that is at
least 6 inches (15 cm) in diameter and
6 feet (2 m) long.
Snares set in holes under woven-wire
fences can be held in place about 1 to 2
inches (2.5 to 5 cm) from the fence with
the snare support system (Fig. 35). The
snare should be set far enough away
from the fence to prevent the lock from
catching on the bottom wire of the
fence. The bottom of the loop should
be about 2 inches (5 cm) above the bot-
tom of the hole. The snares can be an-
chored to the heavy-gauge wire on the
bottom of the fence. Two strands of
baling wire or S hooks can be used to
fasten the snare to the bottom wire.
If there is a chance of accidentally
catching a pet dog, a leg snare set is
recommended (Fig. 36). Set a small
loop about 5 inches (13 cm) or less to
one side of the opening, and set the
bottom of the loop on the ground.
When a coyote goes under a fence, it
places both front feet firmly on the
ground, and sticks its head just under
the bottom wire. Once its head is past
the bottom wire, the coyote begins to
raise its head. The idea is to set the leg
snare so that one front foot will pass
through the snare.
Snares are usually set in the form of a
round or oval loop. In a trail set (Fig.
37), a round loop that is 12 inches (30
cm) in diameter can form an oval loop
that is about 14 inches (36 cm) high
and 10 inches (25 cm) wide. Use a
5/64- or 3/32-inch (0.2- or 0.24-cm)
diameter galvanized aircraft cable for
snaring coyotes. Varying round loop
diameters and heights above ground is
recommended when snaring coyotes
(Table 1). The loop size in a hole in a
fence should vary depending upon the
size of the hole.
Keep slide
clear of
fence
7" to 10"
diameter round
loop
About 2"
brown logwood crystals and dye.
After boiling, snares should be kept
clean of foreign odors. Wear clean
gloves when handling and setting
snares.
How to Set Snares. Snares designed
to capture predators by the neck or leg
are set directly in the animal’s path of
movement and are held in place using
various techniques. One support that
works particularly well can be con-
structed from a 36-inch (0.9-m) piece of
12-gauge galvanized or 9-gauge soft
wire. Form a V bend in the support
wire, about 4 inches (10 cm) from the
end, and drive the wire into the
ground with a notched rod (Fig. 32) to
prevent the support from moving in
the wind. Wrap the snare around the
support about three times and hold it
in place with a U bend formed in the
upper end of the snare support. Bend
the snare cable upward slightly, just
inside the lock, to ensure that the snare
loop is not closed by the wind (Fig. 33).
Snares should be attached to a solid
object so that captured animals cannot
escape (Fig. 34). A steel 1/2-inch (1.3-
cm) diameter rebar, 24 to 30 inches (61
to 72 cm) long (depending on soil
hardness), makes a good anchor for
coyotes and smaller predators. Attach
snares to the rebar with a strong
swivel to prevent tangling and break-
Small loop
(about 5")
Loop on ground to
side of opening
Fig. 36. Leg snare set
Fig. 35. Snare set for woven wire


C-72
Table 1.Specific loop dimensions for
snaring coyotes.
Height of
Round loop
loop above
Type
diameter in
ground in
of set
inches
(cm)
inches
(cm)
Trail
9-12
(23-30)
10-12
(25-30)
Under
fence
7-10
(18-25)
2
(5)
Where to Set Snares. Animals usu-
ally follow the easiest route through
heavy cover. These routes, which gen-
erally consist of trails, are excellent
locations to snare predators. Snares are
effective along trails leading to draw
stations. Some effective locations for
snaring coyotes include: (1) along trails
in thickets or heavy vegetation leading
to a carcass, (2) on trails under fences,
(3) on livestock trails in vacant pas-
tures, (4) in the bottoms of ravines, and
5) on narrow paths inside weeds or
brush. Trails can be created by driving
on weeds or stubble with a pickup, by
walking in snow, or by mowing a trail
through weeds or grass with a weed
eater.
Regulations for Snaring. Snares
are not legal in all states. Where snares
are legal, most states have regulations
which require that snares be visually
inspected every 24 hours. Snares
should be checked early in the morn-
ing to increase the probability of re-
leasing nontarget animals unharmed.
Methods to Avoid Capturing Non-
target Animals. Sites where snares
are set should be carefully selected to
avoid capturing nontarget animals.
Avoid setting snares: (1) in pastures
with livestock, (2) within 25 yards
(23 m) of animal carcasses (to prevent
capturing birds of prey and other scav-
engers), (3) within major deer, elk, or
antelope wintering areas (these big
game animals are much less suscep-
tible to foothold traps), (4) on any trails
being used by livestock, deer, elk, and
other nontarget animals (attract preda-
tors away from these trails with spe-
cific baits and lures), (5) under fences
where livestock, antelope, deer, or
nontarget dogs are using the “crawl
space,” and (6) where people can
readily view captured animals.
Eye guide
points
Not more
than 1"
9" to
12"
Trail
Eye guide
points
No. 9 extension cable
(NOT wire)
Steel stake
10" to 12"
Use a short snare cable to reduce inju-
ries where accidentally captured dogs
might jump over a fence or a tree
branch. Also avoid using entangling
devices (attachments that increase the
chance of killing the snared animal)
where dogs might be captured. Use
the lightest snare lock (breakaway
lock) possible to capture the desired
animal. If livestock, deer, elk, or ante-
lope are captured by a leg, they can
usually break a light lock but may be
held by heavy locks. Record the loca-
tion and number of snares on a map so
they can be found, and remove all
snares when damage stops or when
they cannot be checked frequently.
Shooting
Shooting coyotes is legal in many situ-
ations, and it often ranks high among
the choices for removing a predator.
Safety, however, is a critical factor that
in some circumstances may preclude
the use of firearms (for example, local
laws may prohibit shooting, or neigh-
bors may be too close).
For shooting coyotes, a medium-
powered bolt-action rifle fitted with a
scope is recommended. The .223 Rem-
ington, .22-250, .220 Swift, or the .243
Winchester are all capable of killing a
coyote up to a distance of 250 yards
(225 m). Since coyotes are able to
detect human scent, the shooter should
take a stand downwind from where
the coyote will likely approach. An
elevated location where the lighting
works to the shooter’s advantage is a
good choice. If predators are killing
sheep in the daytime, construct a com-
fortable blind at a vantage point in the
pasture where the killing has occurred.
Whenever possible, rest the rifle on a
solid support while aiming. A home-
made shooting stick will improve
accuracy over shooting freehand.
A shotgun, preferably a 12-gauge
semi-automatic, can be used for shoot-
ing at short range (less than 50 yards
[45 m]). Often it is advisable to have
both a 12-gauge shotgun and a scoped
rifle available. Copper-coated (BB)
lead shot, No. 4 buckshot (lead), and in
newer shotguns, the larger-sized steel
shot works well for killing coyotes.
Fig. 37. Trail snare set


C-73
Shooting From Ground Vehicles.
Shooting from vehicles (snowmobiles,
motorcycles, and pickups) in open, flat
prairie country can be effective and
provide immediate results. Under
most circumstances, however, this
method is not practical as it requires
keen driving skills, is dangerous, and
is illegal in most states.
Calling and Shooting Coyotes.
Coyotes may respond to predator
calls. Calling, like other methods of
predation control, should be used
sparingly and only when needed.
Coyotes can be called at any time of
the day although the first couple of
hours after dawn and the last few
hours before darkness are usually best.
Call in areas where there are signs of
coyotes, such as tracks or droppings.
In some situations, coyotes can be
located by listening to their howling at
sundown and sunrise. Some hunters
use sirens to elicit howls from coyotes.
Often a voice imitation of a coyote
howl works as well. Coyotes often
come to a howl without howling back,
so the prudent hunter is always ready
to shoot.
Hunting at Night. Not many people
have witnessed predators killing live-
stock because it usually occurs at
night, away from human activity. As
stated previously, calling and shooting
predators at night is illegal in many
states. Where legal, however, hunting
at night with the use of artificial lights
may be effective. Red or blue light
tends to spook predators less readily
than white light does. Calling without
the use of artificial lights is effective
only with snow cover and the light of a
full moon.
Aerial Hunting. The use of aircraft
for shooting coyotes is strictly regu-
lated by the provisions of the Airborne
Hunting Act and is allowed only
under special permit in states where
legal. Aerial hunting is selective and
allows taking only the target species.
Although it is costly, it may be one of
the most cost-effective methods of re-
ducing predator damage when all fac-
tors are considered. It is often the best
method where conditions are right for
removing depredating animals that
have successfully evaded traditional
ground control methods such as trap-
ping.
Fixed-wing aerial hunting is limited
primarily to open areas with little
vegetative cover. The greater maneu-
verability of helicopters makes them
more useful for hunting in areas of
brush, scattered timber, and rugged
terrain.
Although aerial hunting can be con-
ducted over bare ground, it is most
effective where there is deep snow
cover. Animals are more visible
against a background of snow and are
much less mobile in their attempts to
avoid the aircraft. Under optimal con-
ditions of clear, sunny skies and fresh
snow cover, much of the hunting can
be accomplished by searching for and
following fresh coyote tracks. Aerial
hunting success can be increased when
conducted with the assistance of a
ground crew. Before the plane arrives,
a ground crew can locate coyotes in
the hunting area by eliciting howls
with a siren, a mouth-blown howler
call, or a voice howl. Two-way radio
communication allows the ground
crew to direct the aircraft toward the
sound of the coyotes, thus reducing
hunting time.
Aerial hunting is not recommended
for, nor undertaken by, most livestock
producers because of the special skills
required of both pilot and gunner and
the danger inherent with the low-level
flight. Although weather, terrain, and
state laws limit the application of this
method, it can often provide a prompt
resolution to depredation problems.
Denning
Predation can frequently be resolved
by locating coyote dens and removing
the pups and/or the adults responsible
for depredations. Denning may also be
warranted as a preventive control
strategy if coyote predation has histori-
cally and consistently occurred in a
particular area during the lambing
season.
Breeding pairs of coyotes are extreme-
ly territorial. They vigorously defend
their territories against other canine
intruders. Coyotes often den year after
year in the same general location. If a
particular denning pair of coyotes has
a history of existing with and not prey-
ing on livestock, it may be to the
producer’s advantage to leave them
alone. Their removal will open up a
territory that may become occupied
with coyotes that are more likely to
prey on livestock.
Although tracking a coyote from a
livestock kill back to its den requires
skill and persistence, it is probably the
most foolproof method to locate the
den of the offending animals. If track-
ing is not feasible because of poor
tracking conditions or lack of the
required skills, there are alternatives
that may be used.
Coyotes will usually howl in response
to a howl from another coyote near
their den. One or both adult coyotes
will often be near the den between 7:30
to 9:00 a.m. A response can be elicited
by voice howling, blowing a coyote
howler call, or broadcasting recorded
calls from a tape player. It is usually
best to wait 30 minutes to 1 hour
between howls because the same
coyotes may not respond again within
that period.
Once the approximate location of a
den is determined, careful planning is
required to ensure the best chance of
immediately removing the adult
coyotes. The hunter should approach
the den unseen and downwind to
within calling distance, armed with a
high powered rifle and/or repeating
shotgun loaded with heavy shot. A call
that imitates the whines or yelps of a
coyote pup can be very effective under
these circumstances, especially when
used in conjunction with a dog to act
as a decoy. A small- to medium-sized
dog moving in the vicinity of the den
gives the coyotes something to focus
on and reduces the likelihood that the
hunter will be detected. The sounds of
a pup in distress along with the sight
of a dog so near the den will cause
most coyotes to display highly aggres-
sive behavior, frequently chasing the
dog back to within close proximity of
the hunter.


C-74
After the adults are removed, the pups
can be killed by fumigating the den
with a gas cartridge registered for this
purpose, or the pups can be dug out
by hand. If attempts to shoot one or
both adults are unsuccessful, the
chances of trapping or snaring them
are improved if the pups are left alive
and confined in the den. This can be
accomplished by driving stakes 2
inches (5 cm) apart down through the
den entrance. Carefully place blind
sets in the den trails or at the den
mound. Capture will often result when
the adults return to investigate the
area. If the adults are not captured
within a reasonable period of time, the
pups should be destroyed. Removal of
the pups is often effective in stopping
predation even if the adult coyotes are
not removed.
An airplane can be used very effec-
tively to locate coyote dens when dep-
redations occur in spring or early
summer in open prairies or sagebrush
terrain. Early morning hours provide
the best light conditions for locating
adult animals near the den site or as
they return from hunting. The low
angle light reflects on the coyote and
provides good contrast with the sur-
rounding vegetation and soil. Actual
den sign, however, shows up better
during the middle of the day with light
coming from directly overhead. Dens
are most easily located after the pups
have begun venturing outside. The
pups soon trample down the vegeta-
tion around the den, making the site
more visible from the air. If aerial
shooting is legal, it is often possible to
remove the adults and pups in one
operation. In open terrain, landings
can often be made within walking dis-
tance of the den.
Although denning requires special
skills, training, and often considerable
time, the advantages can be significant.
A cost-benefit analysis conducted dur-
ing one study determined that the cost
to remove a den of depredating
coyotes could be recovered if only 3.6
lambs were saved. In the same study,
the average number of lambs killed by
each depredating pair of coyotes was
4.9 per week. While these findings in-
dicate that denning could be cost effec-
tive after only a few days, the benefits
actually continue in most instances for
the duration of the season. Denning
can be very selective for the offending
animals and can resolve some depre-
dation problems at relatively low cost.
Hunting with Dogs. Several breeds
are generally known as trailing
hounds, including Walkers, Julys, red-
bones, blueticks, black and tans, Plott
hounds, and English fox hounds. Trail
hounds follow the scent left by a
predator and run it to tree or bay it on
the ground. Coyotes are seldom
caught and killed by trail hounds. In
most instances, trail hounds are used
in combination with sight hounds. The
trail hounds run coyotes into the open,
and then sight hounds are released to
capture the fleeing coyote. More com-
monly, coyotes are shot as they run
from the pack of hounds. Sight
hounds, generally greyhounds or Rus-
sian wolf hounds, are used in open
prairie country to run coyotes down
and kill them.
Economics of Damage
and Control
Sheep numbers in the United States
have declined about 80% from 1942 to
1976 (Gee et al. 1977). Former sheep
producers reported that the principal
reasons for leaving the sheep industry
included high predation losses, low
lamb and wool prices, a shortage of
good hired labor, and the producer’s
age.
The US Fish and Wildlife Service
(1978) estimated the economic impact
of coyote predation on producers with
predator problems, on producers with-
out predator problems, and on con-
sumers during 1977. They used an
average lamb loss rate of 4% (267,000
lambs) and a ewe loss rate of 1.5%
(125,000 ewes) to estimate an economic
loss of $19 million to producers from
coyote predation in the 17 western
states. The reduced number of sheep
and lambs resulted in a higher market
price, which benefited producers by $6
million. The net impact of coyote
predation on sheep producers was a
loss of $13 million, and the impact on
consumers was $4 million in addi-
tional costs. The General Accounting
Office (GAO 1990) estimated that
coyotes in 17 western states killed
sheep and lambs valued at $18 million
in 1989. The National Agricultural
Statistical Service (NASS 1991)
reported that sheep and lamb losses to
coyotes in the United States were
valued at $18.3 million in 1990.
The US Fish and Wildlife Service
(1978) reported calf losses between
birth and weaning to coyotes across
the United States at 0.4%, with preda-
tion decreasing to nearly zero by
weaning time. Dorrance (1982)
reported that coyotes were responsible
for 16% of the 1,520 confirmed preda-
tion losses of cattle in Alberta from
1974 to 1978. Coyote predation on
calves caused producers with coyote
problems across the United States to
lose an estimated $20 million. How-
ever, because of the greater price flex-
ibility of beef compared with sheep,
the reduction in the number of beef
calves marketed (estimated at 0.4%, or
115,000 fewer calves) resulted in a
higher price, which benefited beef pro-
ducers by $81 million. The net impact
of the reduced supply of beef as a
result of coyote predation was a gain
of $61 million to beef producers, but it
cost consumers an additional $98
million in higher prices for beef, result-
ing in an overall loss of $37 million.
NASS (1992) reported that cattle and
calf losses to coyotes in the United
States were valued at $24.3 million in
1991.
Coyote predation also can cause
substantial losses of domestic goats. In
three studies in Texas, where an esti-
mated 1.1 million goats (about 90% of
the goats in the United States) are
raised (Scrivner et al. 1985), predators
were reported to take 18.1% of the
adults and 33.9% of the kids (Pearson
1986). NASS (1991) reported that goat
losses to coyotes in the United States
were valued at $5.7 million in 1990.
Pearson (1986) stated that predators,
particularly coyotes, accounted for


C-75
losses of hundreds of chickens and
turkeys in the 14 western states. In one
study, Andelt and Gipson (1979)
reported that between June 4 and
August 31, 1976, a mated pair of
coyotes apparently killed 268 domestic
turkeys in Nebraska valued at $938.
Although the average value of live-
stock losses to coyotes reflected the
overall impact on producers, it did not
reflect the severity of losses to some
individuals. Balser (1964) and Gee et
al. (1977) indicated that coyote preda-
tion is much more serious for some
producers than others. Most sheep
producers suffer no or minor predator
losses, whereas 20% to 25% of the
producers suffer losses that are signifi-
cantly higher than the average (US
Fish Wildl. Serv. 1978). These losses
can drive producers out of business
because of low profit margins. Non-
fatal injuries and harassment of live-
stock by coyotes also can result in
reduced weight gain and subsequent
reductions in profit.
Acknowledgments
Much of the information and several of the
figures for this chapter were adapted from the
SID Sheep Production Handbook, Predator
Damage Control chapter, published by the
American Sheep Industry Association, Inc.
(1990) and various publications authored by
F. R. Henderson, J. S. Green, W. F. Andelt, G. E.
Connolly, and D. A. Wade.
The section on economics of damage and control
was adapted from Andelt (1987).
Figure 1 by Emily Oseas Routman.
Figure 6 adapted from a USDA-APHIS-ADC
illustration by Renee Lanik, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln.
For Additional
Information
Alberta Agriculture. 1990. Methods of
investigating predation of livestock. Alberta
Agric., Crop Prot. Branch, Agdex 684-4.
36 pp.
Andelt, W. F. 1987. Coyote predation. Pages
128-140 in M. Novak, J. A. Baker, M. E.
Obbard, and B. Malloch. Wild furbearer
management and conservation in North
America. Ontario Ministry. Nat. Resour.
Andelt, W. F. 1988. Proper use of snares for
capturing furbearers. Colorado State Univ.
Coop. Ext. Serv. Pub. 6.517, Fort Collins. 4 pp.
Andelt, W. F., and P. S. Gipson. 1979. Domestic
turkey losses to radio-tagged coyotes. J.
Wildl. Manage. 4:673-679.
Balser, D. S. 1964. Management of predator
populations with antifertility agents. J.
Wildl. Manage. 28:352-358.
Bateman, J. 1971. Animal traps and trapping.
Stackpole Books. Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
286 pp.
Bekoff, M., ed. 1978. Coyotes: biology, behavior,
and management. Academic Press, New York.
384 pp.
Boggess, E. K., F. R. Henderson, and C. W.
Spaeth. 1980. Managing predator problems:
practices and procedures for preventing and
reducing livestock losses. Coop. Ext. Serv.
C-620, Kansas State Univ., Manhattan. 19 pp.
Connolly, G. 1992a. Sheep and goat losses to
predators in the United States. Proc. Eastern
Wildl. Damage Control Conf. 5:75-82.
Connolly, G. 1992b. Coyote damage to livestock
and other resources. Pages 161-169 in A. H.
Boer, ed. Proceedings, ecology and
management of the eastern coyote. Univ.,
New Brunswick, Fredericton.
Connolly, G. E. 1988. M-44 sodium cyanide ejectors
in the Animal Damage Control program, 1976-
1986. Proc. Vertebr. Pest Conf. 13:220-225.
Connolly, G. E. and W. M Longhurst. 1975. The
effects of control on coyote populations — a
simulation model. Univ. California, Coop.
Ext. Serv. Bull. 1872. 37 pp.
deCalesta, D. S. 1983. Building an electric
antipredator fence. Pacific Northwest Ext.
Pub. 225. 11 pp.
Dorrance, M. J. 1982. Predation losses of cattle in
Alberta. J. Range Manage. 35:690-692.
Gee, C. K., W. R. Bailey, R. L. Gum, and L. M.
Arthur. 1977. Sheep and lamb losses to
predators and other causes in the western
United States. US Dep. Agric., Econ. Res.
Serv., Agric. Econ. Rep. 369. 41 pp.
Gee, C. K., D. B. Nielsen and D. M. Stevens.
1977. Factors in the decline of the western
sheep industry. US Dep. Agric., Econ. Res.
Serv., Agric. Econ. Rep. 377. 31 pp.
General Accounting Office (GAO). 1990.
Wildlife management effects of Animal
Damage Control program on predators.
GAO/RCED-90-149, US General Account.
Office, Washington, DC. 31 pp.
Gier, H. T. 1968. Coyotes in Kansas. Revised.
Kansas State Coll. Agric. Exp. Stn. Bull. 393.
118 pp.
Green, J. S. ed. 1987. Protecting livestock from
coyotes: a synopsis of the research of the
Agricultural Research Service. Natl. Tech.
Info. Serv. PB 88 133590/AS. 105 pp.
Green, J. S., and R. A. Woodruff. 1991. Livestock
guarding dogs protect sheep from predators.
US Dep. Agric., Agric. Info. Bull. No. 588.
31 pp.
Henderson, F. R. 1986. “How to Call a Coyote,”
Kansas State Univ., Coop. Ext. Serv.,
Manhattan. Pub. C-400. 4 pp.
Henderson, F. R. 1987. How to trap a coyote.
Kansas State. Univ., Coop. Ext. Serv., Pub.
C-660. 12 pp.
Henderson, F. R. 1988. Use of snares for
capturing coyotes. CES, Kansas State Univ.,
Coop. Ext. Serv. Pub. C-698., Manhattan.
4 pp.
Henderson, F. R., E. K. Boggess, and R. J. Robel.
1977. Understanding the coyote. Kansas
State Univ. Coop. Ext. Serv., Pub. C-578.,
Manhattan. 24 pp.
Hulet, C. V., D. M. Anderson, J. N. Smith, W. L.
Shupe, C. A. Taylor, Jr., and L. W. Murray.
1989. Bonding of goats to sheep and cattle
for protection from predators. Appl. An.
Behav. Sci. 22:261-267.
Knowlton, F. F. 1972. Preliminary interpretations
of coyote population mechanics with some
management implications. J. Wildl. Manage.
36:369-382.
Linhart, S. B., G. J. Dasch, and F. J. Turkowski. 1981.
The steel leghold trap: techniques for reducing
foot injury and increasing selectivity. Proc.
Worldwide Furbearer Conf. 3:1560-1578.
Linhart, S. B., J. D. Roberts, and G. J. Dasch. 1981.
Electric fencing reduces coyote predation on
pastured sheep. J. Range Manage. 35:276-281.
Linhart, S. B., R. T. Sterner, G. J. Dasch, and J. W.
Theade. 1984. Efficacy of light and sound
stimuli for reducing coyote predation upon
pastured sheep. Prot. Ecol. 6:75-84.
Meduna, R. 1977. Relationship between sheep
management and coyote predation. M.S. Thesis,
Kansas State Univ., Manhattan. 140 pp.
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS).
1991. Sheep and goat predator loss. US Dep.
Agric., Agric. Statistics Board, Washington,
DC.
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS).
1992. Cattle and calves death loss. US Dep
Agric., Agric. Statistics Board, Washington,
DC.


C-76
Pearson, E. W. 1986. A literature review of livestock
losses to predators in western U.S. US Fish
Wildl. Serv. Final Rep., Denver, Colorado. 20
pp.
Robel, R. J., A. D. Dayton, F. R. Henderson, R. L.
Meduna, and C. W. Spaeth. 1981. Relationships
between husbandy methods and sheep losses
to canine predators. J. Wildl. Manage. 45:894-
911.
Scrivner, J. H. 1983. The 1080 toxic collar: economics
of field use in Texas. Proc. Western Wildl.
Damage Control Conf. 1:201-204.
Scrivner, J. H., D. A. Wade, G. E. Connolly, and
L. C. Howard, Jr. 1985. The effects of
predation on an Angora goat ranch. Nat.
Wool Grower. 75:10-13.
Shelton, M. 1984. The use of conventional and
electric fencing to reduce coyote predation
on sheep and goats. Texas Agric. Exp. Stn.
MP 1556. 12 pp.
Till, J. A., and F. F. Knowlton. 1983. Efficacy of
denning in alleviating coyote depredations
on domestic sheep. J. Wildl. Manage.
47:1018-1025.
Todd, A. W. and L. B. Keith. 1976. Responses of
coyotes to winter reductions in agricultural
carrion. Alberta Wildl. Tech. Bull. 5. 32 pp.
USDA. 1993. Animal Damage Control Program.
Supplement to the Draft Environmental
Impact Statement-1992. US Dep. Agric.
Washington, DC.
US Fish and Wildlife Service. 1978. Predator
damage in the West: a study of coyote
management alternatives. US Fish Wildl.
Serv., Washington, DC. 168 pp.
Wade, D. A. 1973. Control of damage by coyotes
and some other carnivores. Colorado State
Univ., Coop. Ext. Serv. Bull. 482a. 16 pp.
Wade, D. A. 1976. The use of aircraft in predator
control. Vertebr. Pest Conf. Proc. 7:154-160.
Wagner, F. H. 1988. Predator control and the
sheep industry: the role of science in policy
formation. Regina Books, Claremont,
California. 230 pp.
Walton, M. T., and C. A. Feild. 1989. Use of donkeys
to guard sheep and goats in Texas. Eastern
Wildl. Damage Control Conf. 4:87-94.
Young, S. P., and H. T. Jackson. 1951. The clever
coyote. The Stackpole Co., Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania, and the Wildl. Manage. Inst.,
Washington, DC. 411 pp.
Video Tapes
Video tape, VHS. “Livestock Guarding Dogs,
Protecting Sheep From Coyotes.” US Dep.
Agric., An. Plant Health Inspect. Serv., An.
Damage Control.
Video tape, VHS. “How to Call a Coyote.”
Kansas State Univ., Coop. Ext. Serv.
Manhattan.
Video tape VHS. “How to Snare a Coyote.”
Kansas State Univ. Coop. Ext. Serv.,
Manhattan.
Video tape, VHS. “A Matter of Perspective.”
Texas A&M Coop. Ext. Serv. San Angelo.
Video tape, VHS. “How to Trap a Coyote.”
Colorado State Univ. Coop. Ext. Serv., Fort
Collins.
Editors
Scott E. Hygnstrom
Robert M. Timm
Gary E. Larson
