--- 
source: 1999-2.pdf
--- 

Estimated Sea Otter Population Size in Glacier Bay
8-13 May 1999
J.L. Bodkin
G.G. Esslinger
D.M. Monson
13 December, 1999
U.S. Geological Survey
Alaska Biological Science Center
1011 East Tudor Road
Anchorage, AK 99503


Introduction
Nearshore marine communities support a wide array of commercially, recreationally
and culturally valuable resources including plants, invertebrates, birds, and
mammals.  In order to understand, quantify and attribute cause to changes in these
communities, it is imperative to understand primary sources of community
structuring and of natural or background levels of variation in the ecosystem.  The
sea otter, once nearly extinct, is currently reoccupying previous habitat in much of
the north Pacific, including Glacier Bay.  The role of sea otters in structuring
nearshore marine communities is recognized as significant, particularly among
exposed rocky shorelines.  However, much less is known of the effects of sea otter
reintroduction into soft sediment habitats.  It is now possible to examine effects of
sea otter foraging as they begin to recolonize Glacier Bay National Park and
Preserve in southeast Alaska, a predominantly soft bottom sediment community.
Various pieces of data are necessary to evaluate changes in nearshore marine
communities and to allow careful determination of the causal role of sea otters in
such changes.  Information on the distribution and abundance of sea otters in and
around Glacier Bay will provide a description of the spatial and temporal process of
sea otter recolonization and provide the basis for study sites to evaluate changes in
community structure before and after the effects of sea otters.  
Surveys from boats and fixed-wing aircraft have been conducted to document sea
otter distribution and relative abundance.  In 1999, a more intensive survey of
Glacier Bay was designed in conjunction with methodology developed from
surveying sea otters in other parts of Alaska.  This aerial survey design has several
advantages over previous surveys: 1) stratified sampling maximizes sampling
effort, 2) systematic transects sample evenly across strata, 3) bias is reduced by
estimating the proportion of sea otters not detected, and 4) replication provides a
more precise estimate of population size and reduces sampling error.  Results of
this survey provide a relatively unbiased estimate of population size, that can be
used as a bench mark to evaluate future changes in population size.  This survey is
a cooperative project between the USGS/Alaska Biological Science Center and
Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve.
Methods
Aerial survey methods follow those described in detail in Bodkin and Udevitz (1999)
and consisted of two components: 1) strip transects and 2) intensive search units to
estimate the probability of detection of otters along strips.  Sea otter habitat was
sampled in two strata, a high and a low density, distinguished by distance from
shore and bathymetry.  Survey effort was allocated proportional to expected sea
otter abundance by systematically adjusting spacing of transects within each
stratum. Transects 400 m wide were surveyed by a single observer at an airspeed


of 65 mph (29 m/sec) and an altitude of 300 ft (91 m).   Strip transect data included
date, transect number, location, group size and group activity (diving or not diving). 
A group was defined as one or more otters separated by less than 4 m.  Transect
end points were identified by latitude/longitude coordinates in Arc Info and
displayed visually in a aeronautical global positioning system (GPS) in the aircraft. 
Intensive searches were conducted systematically along strip transects to estimate
the proportion of animals not detected during strip counts.
The survey design consisted of 18 strip transect scenarios constructed in a GIS
(ARC/INFO) consisting of 3 possible high density sets of transects and 6 sets of low
density transects.  Transects were charted throughout Glacier Bay, but this survey
focused on the lower bay (Fig. 1) since sea otters do not yet occur in the upper bay. 
The lower bay survey area included 272 km2 of high density stratum and 274 km2
of low density stratum.  Five replicates were randomly selected from the 18
possible and surveyed by a single observer from a Bellanca Scout between 8 and
13 May 1999.  Both the pilot and the observer had previous experience using the
survey technique and were familiar with Glacier Bay.  See Appendix A for a
detailed description of the survey methods used.
Results
The five replicate surveys required 35 hours of flight time to complete, including
transit to and from Bartlett Cove.  The mean of four individual replicates yielded an
adjusted population size estimate of 384 (SE = 111).  The first replicate was
excluded because it lacked the minimum amount of data needed to calculate a
correction factor for sea otters not detected.  Sea otter pups are combined with
adults for population estimation because large pups are often indistinguishable
from adults and small pups can be difficult to sight from aircraft.  All group locations
were digitized by survey into ARC/INFO coverages (Fig. 2).
Discussion
Sea otters are more evenly distributed throughout the lower bay than in prior survey
years with concentrations near Leland Island, Boulder Island, and Point Carolus
(Fig. 2).  Because lower Glacier Bay encompasses the forefront of an expanding
sea otter population, immigration and emigration are likely to be the major factors
driving abundance estimates.  Previous aerial and boat surveys, covering Glacier
Bay as well as surrounding areas in Icy Strait and Cross Sound, have shown
evidence of seasonal movements.  This variation may explain why 410 adults and
73 pups were counted during an August 1998 boat survey in lower Glacier Bay. 
The current survey design proved highly effective overall, but one component can be
improved.  High and low density strata were defined by a combination of criteria,


including depth and distance from shore (Bodkin and Udevitz 1999).  Although
these criteria seem to predict sea otter habitat accurately, application of this
technique in Prince William Sound has shown that strata modifications are
sometimes necessary to include unique areas.  These areas tend to occur where
resting sea otters drift far from shore, over deep water.  In Glacier Bay, one such
area was identified in a triangle formed by South Marble, Leland, and Flapjack
Islands.  This region should be reclassified as a high density area and sampled
accordingly in future surveys.
The number of sea otters occupying Glacier Bay is increasing rapidly, from a count
of 5 in 1995 to nearly 400 in 1998 (Table 1).  This increase is undoubtedly due to
both immigration of adults and juveniles as well as reproduction by females in the
Bay, evidenced by dependent pups.  One adult female tagged in Port Althorp in
1998 was observed near South Marble Island in July 1999 with a dependant pup. 
Predation by sea otters on a variety of invertebrates, including several species of
crab, clams, mussels, and urchins will likely have profound effects on the benthic
community structure and function of the Glacier Bay ecosystem.  Continuing sea
otter surveys and studies of benthic communities will provide valuable information to
those responsible for managing Park resources.
References
Bodkin, J.L., and M.S. Udevitz.  1999.  An aerial survey method to estimate sea
otter abundance.  Pages 13-26 in G.W. Garner et al., editors.  Marine Mammal
Survey and Assessment Methods.  Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands.


Table 1.  Sea otter counts from aerial surveys in Cross Sound, Icy Straits and Glacier
Bay, 1994-1999. Counts are presented as adults/ pups, and a period equals no data. The
Scout is a Bellanca Scout and the 172 and 185 are Cessnas.  
                                     
May 94
May 95
Mar 96
Aug 96
May 97
Mar 98
May 99
date
                                
Scout
Scout
172
172
Scout
185
Scout
Aircraft
survey area
Spencer-Pt Wimbledon
69/20
60/9
31/4
19/2
43/3
8
6
Pt Wimbledon-Pt. Dundas
37/1
23
18
52
24
52
27
Pt Dundas-Pt Gustavus
0
12/1
41/1
178/4
10
1
17
Glacier Bay Proper
.
5
39
0
21
209
384*
Excursion Inlet
.
.
.
.
.
7
1
Pt Couverdon
.
.
.
.
.
2
.
Pt Gustavus-Porpoise Is.
29/0
94/1
73
2/1
161
8
18
Cannery Pt-Crist Pt
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Crist Pt-Gull Cove
55
15/3
30/1
17/1
92/15
23
97/3
Lemesurier Is.
33/8
62/23
56/2
47/8
143/32
10
67/17
Gull Pt-Pt Lavina
77
81
48
141
94
3
90
Inian Is.
31/9
36/16
11/1
30/12
31/8
10
18/4
Pt Lavina-Column Pt
100/31
159/73
42/3
94/21
148/25
31
21/7
Total
431/69
547/126
389/12
580/49
767/83
364
746/31


Appendix A.
SAMPLING PROTOCOL FOR SEA OTTER AERIAL SURVEYS
Overview of survey design
The survey design consists of 2 components: (1) strip transect counts and (2)
intensive search units.
1)
Strip Transect Counts
Sea otter habitat is sampled in two strata, high density and low density,
distinguished by distance from shore and depth contour.  The high density stratum
extends from shore to 400 m seaward or to the 40 m depth contour, whichever is
greater.  The low density stratum extends from the high density line to a line 2 km
offshore or to the 100 m depth contour, whichever is greater.  Bays and inlets less
than 6 km wide are sampled entirely, regardless of depth.  Transects are spaced
systematically within each stratum.  Survey effort is allocated proportional to
expected otter abundance in the respective strata.
Prior to surveying a geographic area (e.g. College Fjord, Prince William Sound),
the observer will determine which side of the transect lines (N, S, E, or W) has less
glare.  The side with less glare will be surveyed by a single observer in a fixed-wing
aircraft.  Transects with a 400 meter strip width are flown at an airspeed of 65 mph
(29 m/s) and an altitude of 300 feet (91 m).  The observer searches forward as far
as conditions allow and out 400 m, indicated by marks on the aircraft struts, and
records otter group size and location on a transect map.  A group is defined as 1 or
more otters spaced less than 3 otter lengths apart.  Any group greater than 20
otters is circled until a complete count is made.  A camera should be used to
photograph any groups too large and concentrated to count accurately.  The number
of pups in a group is noted behind a slash (eg. 6/4 = 6 adults and 4 pups). 
Observation conditions are noted for each transect and the pilot does not assist in
sighting sea otters.
2)
Intensive Search Units
Intensive search units (ISU's) are flown at intervals dependant on sampling
intensity*, throughout the survey period.  An ISU is initiated by the sighting of a
group and is followed by 5 concentric circles flown within the 400 m strip
perpendicular to the group which initiated the ISU.  The pilot uses a stopwatch to
time the minimum 1 minute spacing between consecutive ISU's and guide the
circumference of each circle.  With a circle circumference of 1,256 m and an
airspeed of 65 mph (29 m/s), it takes 43 seconds to complete a circle (e.g. 11
seconds/quarter turn).  With 5 circles, each ISU takes about 3.6 minutes to


Appendix A.
complete. ISU circle locations are drawn on the transect map and group size and
behavior is recorded on a separate form for each ISU.  For each group, record
number observed on the strip count and number observed during the circle counts. 
Otters that swim into an ISU post factum are not included and groups greater than
20 otters cannot initiate an ISU. 
Behavior is defined as "whatever the otter was doing before the plane got there"
and recorded for each group as either diving (d) or nondiving (n).  Diving otters
include any individuals that swim below the surface and out of view, whether
traveling or foraging.  If any individual(s) in a group are diving, the whole group is
classified as diving.  Nondiving otters are animals seen resting, interacting,
swimming (but not diving), or hauled-out on land or ice.
* The targeted number of ISU's per hour should be adjusted according to sea otter
density.  For example, say we have an area that is estimated to take 25 hours to
survey and the goal is to have each observer fly 40 "usable" ISU's; an ISU must
have more than one group to be considered usable.  Because previous data show
that only 40 to 55% of the ISU's end up being usable, surveyors should average at
least 4 ISU's per hour.  Considering the fact that, one does not always get 4
opportunities per hour - especially at lower sea otter densities, this actually means
taking something like the first 6 opportunities per hour.  However, two
circumstances may justify deviation from the 6 ISU's per hour plan:
1)
 If the survey is not progressing rapidly enough because flying ISU's is
too time intensive, reduce the minimum number of ISU's per hour
slightly
2)
 If a running tally begins to show that, on average, less than 4 ISU's
per hour are being flown, increase the targeted minimum number of
ISU's per hour accordingly.
The bottom line is this: each observer needs to obtain a preset number of ISU's for
adequate statistical power in calculation of the correction factor.  To arrive at this
goal in an unbiased manner, observers must pace themselves so ISU's are evenly
distributed throughout the survey area. 


Appendix A.
Preflight
Survey equipment: 
binder:
random map set selections
map sets (observer, pilot, & spare copies)
strip forms (30)
ISU forms (60)
survey protocol
Trimble GPS procedures
data entry formats
laptop computer for data entry
floppy disk with transect waypoints
Solidstate data drive with power adaptor & interface cable
RAM cards with transect waypoints
RAM card spare batteries
low power, wide angle binoculars (e.g. 4 X 12)
clipboards (2)
pencils
highlighter pen
stopwatch for timing ISU circles
35 mm camera with wide angle lens
high-speed film
survival suits
Airplane windows must be cleaned each day prior to surveying.
Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates used to locate transect starting and
end points, must be entered as waypoints by hand or downloaded from an external
source via a memory card.  
Electrical tape markings on wing struts indicate the viewing angle and 400 m strip
width when the aircraft wings are level at 300 feet (91.5 m) and the inside boundary
is in-line with the outside edge of the airplane floats.
The following information is recorded at the top of each transect data form:
Date - Recorded in the DDMMMYY format.
Observer - First initial and up to 7 letters of last name.
Start time - Military format.
Aircraft - Should always be a tandem seat fixed wing which can safely survey
at 65-70 mph.
Pilot - First initial and up to 7 letters of last name.


Appendix A.
Area - General area being surveyed.
Observation conditions
Factors affecting observation conditions include wind velocity, seas, swell, cloud
cover, glare, and precipitation.  Wind strong enough to form whitecaps creates
unacceptable observation conditions.  Occasionally, when there is a short fetch, the
water may be calm, but the wind is too strong to allow the pilot to fly concentric
circles.  Swell is only a problem when it is coupled with choppy seas.  Cloud cover
is desirable because it inhibits extreme sun-glade.  Glare is a problem that can
usually be moderated by observing from the side of the aircraft opposite the sun. 
Precipitation is usually not a problem unless it is extremely heavy.
Chop (C) and glare (G) are probably the most common and important factors
effecting observation conditions.  Chop is defined as any deviation from flat calm
water up to whitecaps.  Glare is defined as any amount of reflected light which may
interfere with sightability.  After each transect is surveyed, presence is noted as C,
G, or C/G and modified by a quartile (e.g. if 25% of the transect had chop and
100% had glare, observation conditions would be recorded as 1C/4G).  Nothing is
recorded in the conditions category if seas are flat calm and with no glare. 
Observer fatigue
To ensure survey integrity, landing the plane and taking a break after every 1 to 2
hours of survey time is essential for both observer and pilot.  Survey quality will be
compromised unless both are given a chance to exercise their legs, eat, go to the
bathroom, and give their eyes a break so they can remain alert.
Vessel activity
Areas with fishing or recreational vessel activity should still be surveyed.
Special rules regarding ISU’s
1.
Mistaken identity - When an ISU is mistakenly initiated by anything other
than a sea otter (e.g. bird, rock, or floating debris), the flight path should continue for
one full circle until back on transect.  At this point the ISU is to be abandoned as if it
was never initiated and the normal fight path is resumed.
2.
Otters sighted outside an ISU -  Otters sighted outside an ISU which are
noticed during ISU circles are counted only when the ISU is completed, normal flight
path has been resumed, and they are observed on the strip.
 
Unique habitat features 


Appendix A.
Local knowledge of unique habitat features may warrant modification of survey
protocol:
1.
Extensive shoaling or shallow water (i.e. mud flats) may present the
opportunity for extremely high sea otter densities with groups much too large
to count with the same precision attainable in other survey areas. 
Photograph only otters within the strip or conduct complete counts, typically
made in groups of five or ten otters at a time.  Remember, groups >20
cannot initiate an ISU.
Example:
Orca Inlet, PWS.  Bring a camera, a good lens, and plenty of
film.  Timing is important when surveying Orca Inlet; the survey period should
center around a positive high tide - plan on a morning high tide due to the
high probability of afternoon winds and heavy glare. Survey the entire area
from Hawkin's cutoff to Nelson Bay on the same high tide because sea otter
distribution can shift dramatically with tidal ebb and flow in this region.  
2.
Cliffs - How transects near cliffs are flown depends on the pilot's capabilities
and prevailing weather conditions.  For transects which intersect with cliff
areas, including tidewater glaciers, discuss the following options with the
pilot prior to surveying. 
In some circumstances, simply increasing airspeed for turning power near
cliffs may be acceptable. However, in steep/cliff-walled narrow passages
and inlets, it may be deemed too dangerous to fly perpendicular to the
shoreline.  In this case, as with large groups of sea otters, obtain complete
counts of the area when possible.
In larger steep-walled bays, where it is too difficult or costly to obtain a
complete count, first survey the entire bay shoreline 400 m out. Then survey
the offshore transect sections, using the 400 m shoreline strip just surveyed
as an approach.  Because this is a survey design modification, these data
will be analyzed separately.
Example:
Herring Bay, PWS.  Several high cliffs border this area.
Example:
Barry Glacier, PWS.  Winds coming off this and other
tidewater glaciers may create a downdraft across the face. 
The pilot should be aware of such unsafe flying conditions and
abort a transect if necessary.
3.
Seabird colonies - Transects which intersect with seabird colonies should
be shortened accordingly. These areas can be buffered for a certain
distance in ARC dependant on factors such as colony size, species


Appendix A.
composition, and breeding status.
Example:
Kodiak Island.  Colonies located within 500 m of a transect
AND Black-legged Kittiwakes > 100 OR total murres > 100
OR total birds > 1,000 were selected from the seabird colony
catalog as being important to avoid.
5.
Drifters - During calm seas, for whatever reason - possibly a combination of
ocean current patterns and geography - large numbers of sea otters can be
found resting relatively far offshore, over extremely deep water, miles (up to 4
miles is not uncommon) from the nearest possible foraging area.
Example:
Port Wells, PWS.  Hundreds of sea otters were found
scattered throughout this area with flat calm seas on 2
consecutive survey years.  As a result, Port Wells was
reclassified and as high density stratum. 
4.
Glacial moraine - Similar to the drifter situation, sea otters may be found
over deep water on either side of this glacial feature.
Example:
Unakwik, PWS.  Like Port Wells, Upper Unakwik was
reclassified as high density stratum.
Planning an aerial survey
Several key points should be considered when planning an aerial survey:
1)
Unless current sea otter distribution is already well known, it is well worth the
effort to do some reconnaissance.  This will help define the survey area and
determine the number of observers needed, spacing of ISU's, etc.  
2)
Plan on using 1 observer per 5,000 otters.
3)
Having an experienced technical pilot is extremely important.  Low level
flying is, by nature, a hazardous proposition with little room for error; many
biologists are killed this way. While safety is the foremost consideration, a
pilot must also be skilled at highly technical flying.  Survey methodology not
only involves low-level flying, but also requires intimate familiarity with a GPS
and the ability to fly in a straight line at a fixed heading with a fixed altitude,
fixed speed, level wings, from and to fixed points in the sky.  Consider the
added challenge of flying concentric 400 meter circles, spotting other air
traffic, managing fuel, dealing with wind and glare, traveling around fog
banks, listening to radio traffic, looking at a survey map, and other


Appendix A.
distractions as well.  Choose the best pilot available.
