--- 
source: 2001-1.pdf
--- 

MAMMALIAN SPECIES
No. 650, pp. 1–3, 2 ﬁgs.
Aonyx congicus.
By Serge Larivie`re
Published 23 January 2001 by the American Society of Mammalogists
FIG. 1.
Dorsal, ventral, and lateral views of cranium and lat-
eral view of mandible of Aonyx congicus (adult, sex unknown, SMF
4636, locality: Molundu, Dja River, South Cameroon). Greatest
length of skull is 143.5 mm.
Aonyx congicus (Lo¨nnberg, 1910)
Congo Clawless Otter
Paraonyx congicus Lo¨nnberg, 1910:3. Type locality ‘‘Lower Con-
go.’’
Aonyx microdon Pohle, 1919:145. Type locality ‘‘Nana-Fluss, bei
Dorf Bomse, Kamerun’’ (5 Cameroon).
Paraonyx philippsi Hinton, 1921:195. Type locality ‘‘British Ru-
anda [5 Rwanda].’’
CONTEXT AND CONTENT. Order Carnivora, family Mus-
telidae, subfamily Lutrinae, genus Aonyx. Aonyx congicus often
was placed in its own genus, Paraonyx, which would include all
clawless otters with small molariform teeth (Davis 1978). However,
the genus Paraonyx does not appear to be valid because tooth size
varies geographically (Davis 1978). Alternatively, A. congicus often
is considered either synonymous with A. capensis (Davis 1978) or
a subspecies of A. capensis (Lo¨nnberg 1910). However, van Zyll
de Jong (1972) and Wozencraft (1993) recognized A. congicus and
A. capensis as separate species. Within A. congicus, Kingdon
(1997) recognized 4 subspecies: A. c. congicus, A. c. microdon,
A. c. philippsi, and A. c. poensis. However, A. c. poensis refers to
Lutra maculicollis (Harris 1968; Lo¨nnberg 1910), and the small
geographic distribution of the species likely does not warrant sub-
speciﬁc designation. Thus, recent authorities consider the species
monotypic (Wozencraft 1993).
DIAGNOSIS. The Congo clawless otter is very similar to the
Cape clawless otter (A. capensis), but the 2 species are only sym-
patric in Rwanda and Uganda. The Congo clawless otter has a more
slender neck and head and smaller and more deeply cusped molars
than does the Cape clawless otter (Kingdon 1997).
Aonyx congicus also is sympatric with the spotted-neck otter
(Lutra maculicollis) and the water mongoose (Atilax paludinosus).
However, Aonyx congicus lacks foot webbing and the spotted mark-
ings on the neck and throat of L. maculicollis (Rowe-Rowe 1978).
The water mongoose has a darker pelage compared with the brown-
and-white coloration of the Congo clawless otter (Dorst and Dan-
delot 1970).
GENERAL CHARACTERS. Pelage is dark brown with con-
spicuous silvery gloss on the anterior parts of the body due to white
tips on hairs. Vibrissae, sides of face, ears, nose, and upper parts
of the chest are grayish or white (Dorst and Dandelot 1970; Lo¨nn-
berg 1910). A distinct marking of black fur exists between the eyes
and nostrils (Kingdon 1977).
Front feet lack claws and webbing. Hind feet are partially
webbed, and small claws are present on digits 2, 3, and 4 (Lo¨nn-
berg 1910).
Mean (range) length of head and body (sex and sample size
unknown) is 85 cm (79–97 cm), and length of tail is 50 cm (41–
56 cm—Kingdon 1977, 1997; Lo¨nnberg 1910). Body mass of adults
ranges from 14 to 34 kg (Kingdon 1977, 1997).
Skull (Fig. 1) is massive. Teeth are smaller and sharper than
those of A. capensis (Lo¨nnberg 1910; Rowe-Rowe and Somers
1998). No skull measurements have been published.
DISTRIBUTION. The Congo clawless otter occurs in the
rainforest of the Congo River basin (Rahm 1966; Rahm and Chis-
tiaensen 1966), extending eastward to the forests and wetlands of
Rwanda, Burundi, and Uganda (Fig. 2). It is common in Central
African Republic and Zaire, rare in Angola, Congo, Gabon, Rwan-
da, and Uganda, and very rare in Cameroon (Crawford-Cabral 1989;
Rowe-Rowe 1990a, 1990b, 1995). The species may occur in Bu-
rundi and Nigeria, although its status in these countries is unknown
(Rowe-Rowe 1990a, 1990b).
FOSSIL RECORD. The Lutrinae reached Africa in the Plio-
cene, but most ancestral forms cannot be linked to current forms
(van Zyll de Jong 1972). Aonyx is ﬁrst genus recorded from the
late Pleistocene at Swartklip and Florisbab in South Africa and at


2
MAMMALIAN SPECIES 650
FIG. 2.
Distribution of Aonyx congicus in Africa (modiﬁed
from Davis 1978; Rowe-Rowe 1990a; Rowe-Rowe and Somers
1998).
Gamble’s sites in Kenya (Hopwood and Hollyﬁeld 1954; Savage
1978), but no information is available on the speciﬁc fossil record
of Aonyx congicus (Savage 1978).
FORM AND FUNCTION. The structure of the toes suggests
that the Congo clawless otter may be more terrestrial than the Cape
clawless otter (Dorst and Dandelot 1970; Lo¨nnberg 1910). The de-
velopment of sensitive, clawless ﬁngers is an adaptation for ﬁnding
food by feel in muddy and cloudy water (Lo¨nnberg 1910; Kingdon
1997). Molars and premolars are sharper than those of A. capensis,
and the skull is slightly smaller (Harris 1968). This weaker den-
tition may be useful for cutting ﬁsh (Dorst and Dandelot 1970;
Rowe-Rowe and Somers 1998).
ECOLOGY. Nothing is known of the reproduction of A. con-
gicus, and very little is known about its biology in general (Mason
1990; Rowe-Rowe 1986, 1995; Rowe-Rowe and Somers 1998).
Congo clawless otters occur mostly in rain forests and lowland
swamp forests, but they also may inhabit forested rivers and streams
(Rowe-Rowe 1990b; Rowe-Rowe and Somers 1998). Congo claw-
less otters consume mostly ﬁsh and crabs, but they opportunistically
eat giant worms, frogs, clawed toads (Xenopus), lizards, insects, and
aquatic birds (Baranga 1995; Carpaneto and Germi 1989). Only 1
parasite has been reported, the nematode Microﬁlaria aonycis
(Round 1968).
Aonyx congicus is sympatric with the water mongoose, spot-
ted-necked otter, and Cape clawless otter. Most likely, segregation
in diet allows those species to coexist (Rowe-Rowe and Somers
1998).
Potential predators of Congo clawless otters include crocodiles
(Crocodilus), leopards (Panthera pardus), pythons (Python), and
large raptors (Carpaneto and Germi 1989; Kingdon 1997). Congo
clawless otters are hunted for fur, may be captured in ﬁsh nets or
ﬁsh traps accidentally, and may be killed by ﬁshermen who regard
them as competitors or because they damage ﬁsh traps (Kingdon
1977, 1997; Rowe-Rowe 1990b). Most regions in which A. con-
gicus occurs are sparsely inhabited by humans, but on the fringes,
deforestation, drainage of wetlands, and agriculture may alter or
destroy natural habitats of the Congo clawless otter (Rowe-Rowe
1990b). Mbuti pygmies in northeastern Zaire use the skins of Congo
clawless otters to make hats (Carpaneto and Germi 1989). The con-
servation status of A. congicus is unknown in many countries
(Rowe-Rowe 1990a, 1990b).
BEHAVIOR. Congo clawless otters are mostly nocturnal and
solitary. They are excellent swimmers and often explore the shores
of rivers and swamps when foraging (Kingdon 1997). During the
day, they sleep in natural cavities along rivers (Carpaneto and Ger-
mi 1989).
GENETICS. Aonyx congicus has 2n 5 38 chromosomes (van
Zyll de Jong 1987).
REMARKS. Similarities in morphology, ecology, and behav-
ior have contributed to the recurring placement of A. congicus un-
der A. capensis. Thus, unknown biological characteristics of this
species may be inferred from the better known A. capensis. Other
vernacular names for A. congicus include Zaire clawless otter,
swamp otter, loutre a` joues blanches du Congo (French), and Kongo
weisswangen-otter (German). The etymological origin of Aonyx is
from the Greek a meaning ‘‘without’’ and onyx meaning ‘‘claw or
nail’’ (Borror 1960). The speciﬁc epithet congicus is from the Latin
sufﬁx icus meaning ‘‘to belong to’’ and refers to the original type
locality (5 Congo).
D. Dyck, M. Mierau, and C. Moore helped with the map. K.
Fuhrmann helped in locating a suitable skull, and Dr. G. Storch of
the Senckenberg Forschungsinstitut und Museum, Germany kindly
provided skull photographs. D. T. Rowe-Rowe and M. J. Somers
reviewed an earlier draft of this manuscript.
LITERATURE CITED
BARANGA, J. 1995.
The distribution and conservation status of
otters in Uganda. Habitat 11:29–32.
BORRER, D. 1960. Dictionary of word roots and combining forms.
National Press Books, Palo Alto, California.
CARPANETO, G. M., AND F. P. GERMI. 1989. The mammals in the
zoological culture of the Mbuti pygmies in north-eastern Zaire.
Hystrix 1:1–83.
CRAWFORD-CABRAL, J. 1989. Distributional data and notes on An-
golan carnivores (Mammalia: Carnivora). I. Small and median-
sized carnivores. Garcia de Orta, Se´ries de Zoologie, Lisboa
14(2):3–27.
DAVIS, J. A. 1978. A classiﬁcation of the otters. Pp. 14–33 in
Otters (N. Duplaix, ed.). International Union for the Conser-
vation of Nature, Otter Specialist Group, Gland, Switzerland.
DORST, J., AND P. DANDELOT. 1970. A ﬁeld guide to the larger
mammals of Africa. Houghton Mifﬂin Company, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts.
HARRIS, C. J. 1968. Otters: a study of the recent Lutrinae. Wei-
denfeld and Nicolson, London, United Kingdom.
HINTON, M. A. C.
1921.
Paraonyx—a new genus of clawless
otter. Annals and Magazine of Natural History 7:194–200.
HOPWOOD, A. T., AND J. P. HOLLYFIELD. 1954. An annotated bib-
liography of the fossil mammals of Africa (1742–1950). British
Museum of Natural History, Fossil Mammals of Africa 8:1–
194.
KINGDON, J. 1977. East African mammals: an atlas of evolution in
Africa. Academic Press, London, United Kingdom 3A:1–476.
KINGDON, J. 1997. The Kingdon ﬁeld guide to African mammals.
Academic Press, San Diego, California.
LO¨ NNBERG, E. 1910. A new subspecies of clawless otter (Aonyx
capensis congica) from Lower Congo. Arkiv fo¨r Zoologi 7:1–8.
MASON, C. 1990. An introduction to the otters. Pp. 4–7 in Otters:
an action plan for their conservation (P. Foster-Turley, S. Mac-
donald, and C. Mason, eds.). International Union for the Con-
servation of Nature, Otter Specialist Group, Gland, Switzer-
land.
POHLE, H. 1919. Die Unterfamilie der Lutrinae. (Eine systema-
tisch-tiergeographische Studie an dem Material der Berliner
Museen.) Archiv fo¨r Naturgeschichte 85A(9):1–247.
RAHM, U. 1966. Les mammife`res de la foreˆt e´quatoriale de l’est
du Congo. Muse´e Royal de l’Afrique Centrale, Annales Se´rie
IN-8, Science Zoologiques 149:39–121.
RAHM, U., AND A. CHRISTIAENSEN. 1966. Les mammife`res de l’Iˆle
Idjwi (Lac Kivu, Congo). Muse´e Royal de l’Afrique Centrale,
Annales Se´rie IN-8, Science Zoologiques 149:1–35.
ROUND, M. C. 1968. Check list of the helminth parasites of Af-
rican mammals of the orders Carnivora, Tubulidentata, Pro-
boscidea, Hyracoidea, Artiodactyla and Perissodactyla. Tech-
nical Communication on the Commonwealth Bureau of Hel-
minthology, St. Albans 38:1–252.


3
MAMMALIAN SPECIES 650
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1978. Biology of the two otter species in South
Africa. Pp. 130–139 in Otters (N. Duplaix, ed.). International
Union for the Conservation of Nature, Otter Specialist Group,
Gland, Switzerland.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T.
1986.
African otters—is their existence
threatened? International Union for the Conservation of Na-
ture, Otter Specialist Group Bulletin 1:9–11.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1990a. Action plan for African otters. Pp. 41–
51 in Otters: an action plan for their conservation (P. Foster-
Turley, S. Macdonald, and C. Mason, eds.). International
Union for the Conservation of Nature, Otter Specialist Group,
Gland, Switzerland.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T.
1990b.
Recent information on the Congo
clawless otter. International Union for the Conservation of Na-
ture, Otter Specialist Group Bulletin 5:24–27.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1995. Distribution and status of African ot-
ters. Habitat 11:8–10.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T., AND M. J. SOMERS. 1998. Diet, foraging be-
haviour and coexistence of African otters and the water mon-
goose. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 71:215–
227.
SAVAGE, R. J. G. 1978. Carnivora. Pp. 249–267 in Evolution of
African mammals (V. J. Maglio and H. B. S. Cooke, eds.).
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
VAN ZYLL DE JONG, C. G. 1972. A systematic review of the Ne-
arctic and Neotropical river otters (genus Lutra, Mustelidae,
Carnivora). Life Sciences Contributions of the Royal Ontario
Museum 80:1–104.
VAN ZYLL DE JONG, C. G.
1987.
A phylogenetic study of the
Lutrinae (Carnivora; Mustelidae) using morphological data.
Canadian Journal of Zoology 65:2536–2544.
WOZENCRAFT, W. C.
1993.
Order Carnivora. Pp. 279–348 in
Mammal species of the world: a taxonomic and geographic
reference (D. E. Wilson and D. M. Reeder, eds.). Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Editors of this account were ELAINE ANDERSON and LESLIE N. CAR-
RAWAY. Managing editor was VIRGINIA HAYSSEN.
S. LARIVIE` RE, DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF SASKATCH-
EWAN, 112 SCIENCE PLACE, SASKATOON, SASKATCHEWAN S7N 5E2,
CANADA,
AND INSTITUTE
FOR WETLAND
AND WATERFOWL RE-
SEARCH, DUCKS UNLIMITED, ONE WATERFOWL WAY, MEMPHIS, TEN-
NESSEE 38120-2351.
