--- 
source: 2002.pdf
--- 

A Biodiversity Action Plan for Hertfordshire 
Herts & Middlesex Wildlife Trust 
247
 
 
14 
OTTER SPECIES ACTION PLAN 
 
14.1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
As a 'top predator' the Otter Lutra lutra is naturally scarce and also highly sensitive to 
the health of the whole ecosystem that supports it.  As such, the Otter is an important 
indicator species in riparian habitats.  As recently as the 1950s it was widespread.  
However, a significant decline in numbers took place in the 1960s and 1970s, which 
was attributed to the use of persistent organochlorine pesticides, especially Dieldrin and 
Aldrin.  While other factors are likely to have been involved, such as habitat loss, the 
detailed reasons for decline are not fully understood. 
 
The Otter has high public appeal.  Otter-related events generally attract much attention. 
The value of such an animal in raising awareness generally about nature conservation, 
and the water environment in particular, is considerable. 
 
 
14.2 
CURRENT STATUS 
 
National surveys showed an actual or effective extinction over most of the Midlands and 
south-eastern counties as numbers reached an all time low in the 1980s.  Otters became 
extinct in Hertfordshire in the late 1970s.  Viable populations remained in Scotland, 
Wales and south-west England.  This decline also occurred on the continent and the UK 
populations are one of the best left in Europe. 
 
Recently there has been an encouraging expansion in range and (probably) numbers, 
notably from the south-west.  This spread has taken place despite increasing numbers of 
Mink, indicating that the establishment of wild Mink populations and consequent food 
competition was probably not a cause of Otter decline, as is often suggested.  However, 
expansion has been mainly from the regions least affected by decline, other areas such as 
Yorkshire and Northumberland have not shown the same trends. 
 
The re-introduction of Otters to former haunts has also taken place in recent years, 
notably in East Anglia.  In Hertfordshire 6 Otters were re-introduced to 2 sites in 
1991/92 by the Otter Trust.  Their subsequent movements were monitored by the 
Wildlife Trust and the Herts Mammal Group.  Currently it is known that these animals 
have bred at least once, at Rye Meads in 1995, and that Otters are still present along the 
valleys of the Stort and lower Lee.  However, their movements appear to be restricted to 
a small area, probably as a result of poor quality river habitat and the numbers of Otters 
present is unknown. 
 
The Otter is protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (Schedule 5) and is 
listed on Annexes 2a and 4a of the EC Habitats Directive, Appendix 2 of the Bern 
Convention and Appendix 1 of CITES. 
 
 
 
 


A Biodiversity Action Plan for Hertfordshire 
Herts & Middlesex Wildlife Trust 
248
 
14.3 
CURRENT FACTORS CAUSING LOSS OR DECLINE 
 
14.3.1 Water Quality 
 
Pollution of water courses, especially by polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's) is thought to 
be a major issue.  PCBs incorporate a wide range of substances which are likely to act as 
pollutants, and the complex way they interact in the aquatic environment, and with 
Otters, is still poorly understood.  Low flows can concentrate pollution levels adding to 
the problem and potentially reducing food availability. 
 
14.3.2 Insufficient Food 
 
Insufficient prey (low fish stocks) associated with poor water quality and poor river 
habitat quality may be relevant in some areas. 
 
14.3.3 Loss of Habitat 
 
Impoverished bankside features needed for breeding and resting, due to the continuing 
loss or degradation of wetland habitats, is likely to be a contributory factor. 
 
14.3.4 Accidental Death 
 
Incidental mortality, primarily by road deaths forms a significant issue locally.  
Drowning in fish/eel traps, may also be an issue in some areas, but is not an important 
factor locally. 
 
 
14.4 
CURRENT ACTION 
 
The JNCC has prepared a "Framework for Otter Conservation in the UK 1995-2000". 
 
National Surveys have been conducted at 5-7 year intervals and may be repeated in the 
future.  Local surveys by Wildlife Trusts and others have established the present 
distribution and the potential for future spread.   
 
Practical conservation management (eg river enhancement schemes, creation of logpiles 
and artificial holts) is in progress.  Corporate responsibility for Otter Conservation and 
management has been accepted and acted upon by the Environment Agency - formerly 
the National Rivers Authority (NRA).  In Hertfordshire, the NRA and BT supported an 
Otter Habitat Project from 1991-3 which surveyed river catchments in the county and 
drew up a priority list of river enhancement schemes. 
 
Releases of captive bred Otters have successfully reinforced fragmented wild 
populations in East Anglia and Yorkshire, although success elsewhere is unproven and 
the whole issue of releasing Otters has become controversial.  Research on the 
implications of heavy metal and PCB contamination in fish and the wider environment 
is in progress. 
 
 


A Biodiversity Action Plan for Hertfordshire 
Herts & Middlesex Wildlife Trust 
249
 
 
 
14.5 
OTTER ACTION PLAN OBJECTIVES 
 
To maintain the existing released Otters in order to achieve a viable population in 
Hertfordshire within 10 years. 
 
To achieve a regular presence of Otters throughout Hertfordshire river catchments by 
2010. 
 
To enhance river habitat quality through a programme of river enhancement schemes 
with at least three schemes completed annually for the next 10 years (to overlap with 
Water Vole and White-clawed Crayfish Action Plans, Chapters 11 and 23). 
 
14.6 
PROPOSED ACTION 
 
14.6.1 Policy and Legislation 
 
OT1.  Ensure all wetland Wildlife Sites regularly used by Otters are recognised and 
protected through Local Plans and LEAPs, at the next review.  At the same time 
endeavour to strengthen river corridor policies where appropriate.  
 Action: LA’s, EA, HERC, HMWT. 
 
14.6.2 Site Safeguard and Management 
 
OT2.  Seek to include action for Otters in all LEAPs covering Hertfordshire by the next 
review.  This will include specific river enhancement projects at a target level of 3 per 
year throughout the county, one of which should include specific features for Otters.  
 Action: EA. 
 
OT3.  All riparian nature reserves and country parks to consider the requirements of 
Otters within the management plan by 2000 and subsequently to implement actions if 
appropriate.  
 
 Action: HMWT, RSPB, LA’s, LVRPA. 
 
OT4.  A list of key river corridor sites forming a refuge network for Otters in 
Hertfordshire should be drawn up by 1998 (from Otter Habitat Project Report).  Secure 
appropriate management of these sites over 10 years.  
 Action: HMWT, HMG, EA, LA’s. 
 
14.6.3 Species Management and Protection 
 
OT5.  The merits of a further release of captive bred Otters (to agreed national 
framework) to boost the survival chances of existing animals, should be considered and 
if appropriate, initiated.  Discussion paper by 1998.  
 Action: HMWT, EA, HMG. 
 


A Biodiversity Action Plan for Hertfordshire 
Herts & Middlesex Wildlife Trust 
250
OT6.  Attempt to reduce accidental deaths by identifying key sites for the provision of 
road underpasses or similar and fencing.  Present list to the Environment Agency and 
HCC by 1999.  Seek to undertake remedial work on 50% of sites within 5 years. 
Action: HMWT, HMG, EA. 
 
14.6.4 Advisory 
 
OT7.  All conservation advisers operating within the county to be aware of the 
requirements of Otters and the aims of this plan, and to promote this when in contact 
with riparian landowners.  Arrange a meeting/training seminar by 1999 for conservation 
advisers.  
 Action: HMWT, CMS, FWAG, GC, FRCA. 
 
14.6.5 Research and Monitoring 
 
OT8.  Review existing monitoring arrangements during 1998, with a view to covering 
the movements of the released Otters and likely entry points to the county of “wild” 
Otters as a minimum. Ensure local monitoring is structured to allow inclusion in 
national dataset.  
 
Action: HMWT, HMG, HERC. 
 
OT9.  Contribute to national Otter surveys, as appropriate. 
 Action: HMG, HMWT, HERC. 
 
OT10.  Review and update by 1999 the list of enhancement schemes prepared as part of 
the Otter Habitat Project to ensure degraded stretches of river are highlighted 
(particularly regarding rivers of the Ouse catchment as they were excluded from the 
OHP).  
 
 Action: EA, HMWT. 
 
OT11.  Monitor effectiveness of implemented enhancement schemes, by 2000. 
 Action: EA. 
 
OT12.  Collate information on prey productivity, biomass and pollutant levels.  Report 
as appropriate.  
 Action: EA. 
 
OT13.  Continue studies on the diet of the released Otters in the county.  
 Action: UH, EA.  
14.6.5 Communication and Publicity 
 
OT14.  Organise at least one meeting annually with all interested local parties to discuss 
progress and agree future actions.  
 Action: HMWT, HMG, EA. 
 
OT15.  Progress reports on the released Otters to be sent at least once every 2 years to 
all interested parties.  
 Action: HMWT, EA, HMG. 


A Biodiversity Action Plan for Hertfordshire 
Herts & Middlesex Wildlife Trust 
251
 
OT16.  Use this popular species to publicise the importance of water quality and 
riparian habitats to biodiversity, through events, press releases and articles. At least 1 
event annually. 
 Action: HMWT, EA, EN. 
 
