--- 
source: 2004-10.pdf
--- 

1
LABORATORY MANUAL
FOR MAMMALOGY


2
The Skull
Skull morphology provides important information for identifying mammals and
understanding their biology.  Familiarize yourself with the basic elements and landmarks of the
mammalian skull, as exemplified in a dog or horse skull.
Be sure to find the following bones and landmarks:
Bones
nasal
frontal
lacrimal
parietal
premaxilla
squamosal
maxilla
occipital (supraoccipital, exoccipital, basioccipital)
palatine
dentary
pterygoid
alisphenoid
jugal
Landmarks
narial opening
infraorbital foramen
orbit
lacrimal foramen
(secondary) palate
alisphenoid canal
supraorbital process
foramen ovale
postorbital process
foramen magnum
internal nares
zygomatic arch
glenoid (mandibular) fossa
sagittal crest/temporal fossa
nuchal crest
occipital condyle
auditory bulla
mandibular symphysis
coronoid process
mandibular condyle
angle of mandible


3


4


5
Postcranial skeleton
The rest of the skeleton apart from the skull is known as the postcranial skeleton.
Postcrania can be important for distinguishing different types of mammals and for understanding
their locomotion.
Familiarize yourself with the following bones and their indicated landmarks:
Vertebrae
Atlas and axis: first two cervicals
Cervical: possess transverse foramina
Thoracic: attached to ribs
Lumbar: stout lower back vertebrae
Sacral: connected to the pelvis usually fused into a single element, the sacrum
Caudal: tail vertebrae
Spinous process (neural spine)
zygapophyses: the processes that form the joints between vertebrae
ribs
clavicle
scapula
innominate (pelvic bone)
glenoid fossa
(actually three bones: ilium, ischium, pubis)
spine
acetabulum
humerus
femur
radius
greater, lesser, and third trochanters
ulna
tibia
carpals
medial malleolus
metacarpals
fibula
phalanges
patella
tarsals
astragalus
calcaneum
metatarsals
phalanges
Atlas and axis: first two cervicals


6
Cervical: possess transverse foramina 
Thoracic: attached to ribs
Lumbar: stout lower back vertebrae
Sacral: connected to the pelvis; 
Caudal: tail vertebrae
usually fused into a single element, the sacrum


7
Rib
scapula
clavicle


8
humerus 
radius
ulna
innominate (pelvic bone) (actually three bones: ilium, ischium, pubis)


9
femur and patella
tibia
fibula
manus
pes


10
TEETH
In this lab you will learn about the morphology of mammalian teeth.  By the end of this
lab, you should be able to 1) identify the different types of teeth in the mammalian dentition, 2)
determine dental formulae for various mammals, 3) identify the different cusps on molars of
various mammals, and 4) understand how molars are modified for different diets.
Terms to Know for This Lab
Anterior: towards the front of the mouth.  Incisors are the most anterior teeth.
Posterior: towards the back of the mouth.  Molars are the most posterior teeth.
Labial or Buccal: towards the lip or cheek.  Generally this means the outer side of the teeth.
Remember that, unlike you, the lips of most mammals extend back along the side of the mouth.
Lingual: towards the tongue.  Generally this means the inner side of the teeth.
Occlusal: referring to the "top" of the teeth, the part involved with chewing.  The occlusal
surface of an upper tooth contacts the occlusal surface of the corresponding lower tooth during
chewing.  Occlusal view is the view of the chewing surface of a tooth.
Deciduous: referring to the first generation of teeth, i.e., your "baby" teeth.  Adult teeth usually
replace these teeth around the time of weaning; thus they are sometimes called milk teeth.
Where You Find Teeth
Mammals have teeth in three different bones.  Upper teeth are found in the premaxilla
and maxilla; all lower teeth are found in the dentary.
The Types of Mammalian Teeth
Most mammals have a heterodont dentition, meaning that different teeth in the jaw have
different shapes, and, therefore, functions.  We identify these different tooth types by several
criteria, namely position, shape, and whether or not they are replaced.  The four types of teeth are
incisors, canines, premolars, and molars.
Incisors: When present, these are the anteriormost teeth.  Upper incisors are always found in the
premaxilla.  The incisors of many mammals, such as yours, are designed for nipping off bits of
food, but many variations exist.  Incisors are usually replaced.
Canines: When present, canines lie right behind the incisors.  Upper canines are therefore the
anteriormost teeth in the maxilla.  Canines are generally conical, pointy teeth used for holding
onto prey and in defense or intraspecific combat.  The size of canines differs among mammals,
usually being largest in carnivores, whereas many herbivorous mammals have small canines or
have lost them altogether.  Canines are usually replaced.
Premolars and molars: Premolars and molars are together referred to as the cheek teeth.  Both
types of teeth are usually specialized for grinding or processing food items before swallowing.
Both types of upper teeth are found in the maxilla.  Premolars are posterior to canines, and
molars are posterior to premolars.  Some premolars are replaced, whereas molars are never


11
replaced.  In fact molars are defined as the unreplaced teeth that are posterior to the last replaced
tooth.
Molars are often more similar to deciduous premolars than to adult premolars, and you can
actually think of molars as part of the deciduous generation that comes in late and is never
replaced.
Dental Formulae
The number of each type of tooth differs from taxon to taxon.  In some cases, the number
of a type of tooth differs in the upper and lower jaws of the same species, but right and left are
always the same.  Thus, we can characterize each mammal taxon by a dental formula,
representing the number of incisors, canines, premolars, and molars found in each half (right or
left) of the upper and lower jaws.  We write this formula as I n/n C n/n P n/n M n/n.  I, C, P,
and M refer to the four types of teeth (incisor, canine, premolar, and molar), and n/n refers to the
number of upper and lower teeth of each type found on one side.
As an example, consider our own dentition.  Humans have a total of 32 teeth (including
wisdom teeth), 16 in the upper jaw and 16 in the lower jaw.  Of course, the 8 teeth on the right
side of your upper jaw are basically a mirror image of the 8 on the left, and the same can be said
of the lower jaw.  Thus, the dental formulae reflects the 16 teeth (8 upper, 8 lower) found on
each side and looks like this: I 2/2 C1/1 P 2/2 M 3/3.  It just so happens that humans have the
same number of each tooth type in their upper and lower jaws, but this is not the case for every
mammal.  Here, for instance, is the dental formula of an opossum: I 5/4 C 1/1 P 3/3 M 4/4.
The different dental formulae that we observe today are thought to be derived from an
ancestral mammal that had the following formula: I 5/4 C 1/1 P 4/4 (or P 5/5) M 3/3.  We can
also make inferences about which particular teeth have been lost in various mammals.  In order
to identify a particular tooth position, or locus, we number each tooth according to its type, with
the numbers going from anterior to posterior.  Capital letters indicate upper teeth, and lowercase
indicates lower teeth.  Thus, your upper molars are numbered M1, M2, and M3, whereas your
lower molars are m1, m2, and m3.  Compared to the primitive formula, we have lost some
incisors and premolars.  It is thought that the incisors were lost from the posterior end, whereas
the premolars were lost from the anterior end.  Thus, our upper teeth are considered to be I1, I2,
C1, P3, P4, M1, M2, and M3; our lowers are i1, i2, c1, p3, p4, m1, m2, and m3.  Deciduous
teeth are indicated by a lowercase "d", e.g., dP4 would refer to the deciduous fourth upper
premolar.
Molar Morphology
Cheek teeth show a wide variety of specializations among mammals.  Many species can
be identified by the morphology of a single molar.  In order to understand the evolution of
mammalian molars, it is important to be able to recognize homologous structures on teeth.
Looking at the occlusal surface of a molar, its topography is made up of little hills, valleys, and
ridges.  The "hills" or bumps we call cusps; the ridges we call lophs.  All mammalian teeth can
ultimately be derived from a primitive pattern of cusps that we call the tribosphenic molar.


12
Tribosphenic molars are basically triangles of three cusps (plus an extra pair on the lower
molars), but the upper and lower triangles are reversed in their orientation.
Examine the morphology of an upper tribosphenic molar in an opossum.  Make sure you
can identify the following cusps: protocone, paracone, and metacone.  Note the orientation of
the triangle that they form.  Next, examine the lower molar of an opossum.  Identify the
following cusps: protoconid, paraconid, metaconid, entoconid, and hypoconid.  Note the
orientation of the triangle formed by the protoconid, paraconid, and metaconid.  This triangle is
called the trigonid.  The entoconid and hypoconid form a "heel" to the tooth that is called the
talonid.  Note that the talonid forms a deep depression, called the talonid basin.  The protocone
fits into the talonid basin during chewing.  Observe this when you move the jaws of the opossum
skull together.
Many mammals have added cusps to the tribosphenic pattern in order to increase the
chewing surface.  The hypocone is present in many mammals posterior to the protocone.  This
fourth cusp allows the occlusal surface to form a rectangle.  A similar result is obtained in the
lower teeth by reducing or losing a cusp, the paraconid.  Examine a number of herbivorous or
omnivorous mammals and identify the hypocone.
Examine the teeth of a human skull.  Identify the cusps of the molars.  Note that the cusps
are low and rounded, compared to those of an opossum.  Compare this condition with that of a
pig.  Molars with low, rounded cusps are referred to as bunodont.
Examine the teeth of a dog skull.  Note the large blade-like upper premolar and first
lower molar.  These teeth are specialized for shearing or slicing and function in a scissors-like
manner.  They are a specialization for eating meat.  Such teeth are called sectorial.  Note that
dog upper molars are bunodont and retain the tribosphenic pattern.  Dogs are as much omnivores
as carnivores.  (Check out the ingredients of dry dog food if you're skeptical.)
Lophs are present on many mammalian teeth.  The outer (labial/buccal) edge of the molar
is called the ectoloph.  Many herbivorous mammals possess multiple lophs crossing the tooth so
that they act like a file or millstone to grind and shred vegetation.  Such teeth are referred to as
lophodont.  Lophodonty (the condition of being lophodont) has evolved multiple times in
multiple ways.  Sometimes a loph is formed by building up a ridge between two or more cusps.
In other cases, a cusp may be stretched into a loph.  In many cases, it is still possible to identify
the homologues of the cusps of a tribosphenic molar on a lophodont tooth.  Some mammals have
teeth with numerous lophs that defy any identification of cusps.  Examine some of the lophodont
teeth on display and identify cusps when possible.


13
Subclass Prototheria
Order Monotremata
Two living families of mammals represent the Order Monotremata: Ornithorhynchidae
(platypuses) and Tachyglossidae (echidnas or spiny anteaters).  Both of these families are found
only in Australia and New Guinea.  Monotremes are unusual, specialized animals, but they share
the primitive feature of laying shelled eggs.
Among other primitive features that monotremes display are their shoulder girdles, which
resemble those of non-mammalian synapsids and reptiles more than those of other mammals.
Examine the skeleton of a platypus and of an opossum and note the differences.
Family Ornithorhynchidae
Platypuses (Ornithorhynchus anatinus) are semiaquatic and live in streams and rivers, eating
invertebrates and nesting in bankside burrows.
Examine the cast of a platypus skull.  Note the bill, which in life would be covered by sensitive
skin possessing electroreceptors.  The electroreceptors allow the platypus to find prey in murky
water.  Platypuses have no teeth, but they possess horny plates on their jaws, with which they
crush their prey.
Male platypuses possess tarsal spurs, sharp clawlike appendages on their ankles that secrete
venom, one of the few instances of poison production in mammals.
Family Tachyglossidae
Echidnas or spiny anteaters (genera Tachyglossus and Zaglossus) are burrowing animals that
have a lifestyle similar to that of anteaters in South America.  They use their claws to tear into
the nests of social insects like termites and ants.  They then lap up the insects using a long sticky
tongue.  Echidna skulls, like those of other anteaters, are elongate and toothless.
Echidnas possess thick, sharp spines (in fact modified hairs) for protection.  Echidnas will
burrow when faced with danger, so that only their spiny backs are exposed, but they can also roll
into a ball, presenting a predator with nothing but sharp spines. We presently don’t have any
material of echidnas, but pictures and other information are available in your text.


14
Infraclass Metatheria (Marsupialia)
Marsupial characteristics
Examine a skull and the mounted skeleton of an opossum.  A number of features of the skeleton
distinguish marsupials from other mammals.  Note the following:
Skull:
Palatal vacuities: Note the openings in the secondary palate.  All marsupials possess these
palatal vacuities, but few placental mammals do.
Alisphenoid bulla: The auditory bulla, which houses the middle ear, is formed (at least in part)
by the alisphenoid bone only in marsupials.
Jugal contribution to jaw articulation:  Note that the glenoid fossa, the part of the jaw joint
found on the skull, is formed mainly by the squamosal but also by a small portion of the end of
the jugal bone.  This is found in all marsupials, but also in a number of placentals.
Inflected angle of mandible:  Note that the angle of the lower jaw is inflected, or bent inwards.
This is characteristic of marsupials.
Dentition:
Number of incisors:  Marsupials are classified partly on the basis of the number of incisors they
possess.  The opposum possesses the primitive number of incisors for marsupials, 5 upper and 4
lower.  This condition is called polyprotodont.  Marsupials almost always have unequal
numbers of upper and lower incisors.  Many Australian marsupials are characterized by the
possession of only a single enlarged incisor in each half of the lower jaw. This condition is called
diprotodont. Placental mammals never have more than three upper or lower incisors.
Premolars and molars:  Marsupials commonly possess 3 premolars and 4 molars (upper and
lower), whereas placental mammals primitively possess 4 premolars and 3 molars.  Of the
premolars, only the last is replaced.  Note the deciduous premolars still in place in the jaws of the
juvenile opossum.  Deciduous premolars (“milk” or “baby” teeth) usually look like molars.
Postcranial skeleton:
Epipubic bones: The two bones attached to the front of the pubes are the epipubic bones.
Epipubic bones are characteristic of marsupials and are also found in monotremes and some
Cretaceous placentals.  Epipubic bones are sometimes called “marsupial” bones, but they are not
found only in marsupials, and they are found in both sexes, so they are not simply providing
support for the pouch.


15
Order Didelphimorphia
Family Didelphidae
We have representatives in lab of four families of marsupials, Didelphidae, Thylacinidae,
Macropodidae, and Vombatidae.  Didelphids are commonly called opossums.  They are
generally arboreal (tree-climbing) and omnivorous.  They are the largest living family of
marsupials in the western hemisphere, many of them found in South America.
Local species: Didelphis virginiana
Numerous examples of the only North American marsupial, the Virginia opossum, are displayed
in today’s lab.  Opossums are common throughout the eastern United States, including in New
Jersey, and are thus a local species.
Didelphids are polyprotodont marsupials; they have more than one lower incisor in each
mandible.
Note the skull of Marmosa.  Marmosa is a small didelphid from South America.  What is its
dental formula?
Order Dasyuromorpha
Family Thylacinidae
The order Dasyuromorpha includes several families of Australian polyprotodont marsupials. The
most diverse family is the Dasyuridae, which includes a wide variety of insectivorous or
carnivorous species, including mouse-sized “rat opossums”, cat-sized quolls, and the most
famous member of the family, the Tasmanian devil, which gets up to 12 kilograms in weight.
Other dasyuromorph families were at one time included in the Dasyuridae but were then given
their own families to recognize their distinctiveness from more typical dasyurids. One such
family is the Thylacinidae, which includes a single genus, Thylacinus, the Tasmanian “wolf” or
“tiger”, also called the thylacine.
Now thought to be extinct, thylacines were found on the Australian mainland in prehistoric
times, but by the time Europeans came to Australia these animals could only be found on the
large southeastern island of Tasmania. The appearance of a thylacine was generally dog-like,
with stripes on the hindquarters that inspired the name “tiger”. Thylacines were the largest
carnivorous marsupials to survive into historical times, and Europeans living in Tasmania
considered thylacines to be threat to their sheep, so bounties were paid for killed thylacines, until
no more were left in the wild. The last known living thylacine died in a European zoo at the
beginning of the twentieth century.
Thylacines provide one of the most striking examples of parallelism, when species in the same
group (mammals in this case) evolve similar forms as adaptations to similar lifestyles in different
locations. The wolves and thylacines independently evolved similar body types, adapted for
running and hunting large prey, filling similar large carnivore niches on different continents.
Compare the cast of a thylacine skull with the skull of a wolf. Note the general similarity in


16
shape of the skull, as well as the sectorial teeth. At the same time, you should still be able to
identify the distinctive marsupial characters (see the beginning of this section) in the thylacine
specimen.
Order Diprotodontia
This order contains the vast majority of the diprotodont marsupials.  Most of these animals are
herbivorous.
Family Macropodidae
One of the diprotodont families of marsupials on display here today is the Macropodidae or
kangaroos.  Examine the kangaroo skulls on display.  Kangaroos are diprotodont; that is, they
have only one large lower incisor in each mandible.  Kangaroos share this condition with a
number of other Australian marsupials, including wombats, koalas, and possums.
Like most diprotodont marsupials, kangaroos are herbivores.  Examine the teeth of a kangaroo
skull.  Note that they consist of two transverse crests.  This pattern is termed bilophodont.  Note
other herbivorous features in this skull, particularly the extra attachments for the masseter (note
the process sticking off of the front of the zygomatic arch) and the height of the mandibular
condyle relative to the tooth row.
Family Vombatidae
Wombats are fossorial herbivores, sort of analogous to large groundhogs.  Examine the cast of a
wombat skull.  There is a single incisor on each side of the upper and lower jaws.  Note the
simple cheek teeth, including one premolar and four two-lobed molars in each quadrant.
Syndactyly: Diprotodont marsupials are syndactylous, a feature they share with the
polyprotodont Peramelidae, the bandicoots.  Syndactyly refers to the condition where two digits
of the foot, in this case digits II and III, share a common skin sheath.  (Digits on the hand and
foot are identified by Roman numerals, so that the thumb or big toe is digit I, and the pinky or
pinky toe is digit V.  Note that digits retain their numbers, even if a species has lost a digit; e.g.,
horses run on their third digits, the only functional digits that they have.)  Thus, syndactyly gives
the appearance of a digit with two claws.
Examine the illustrations of syndactylous feet.  Note that the syndactylous digits are often
reduced in size relative to the others.  Many marsupials use their syndactylous digits for
grooming.
Ant-eating (Myrmecophagy)
A number of different groups of mammals include members that have evolved adaptations for
eating social insects, e.g., ants and termites.  These insects are very common in tropical regions
and live in huge colonies, often in enormous nests of dried mud, hard as concrete, but also within


17
vegetation.  Anteating mammals can be found in the Orders Monotremata, Marsupialia,
Xenarthra, Pholidota, and Tubulidentata, and in several families of the Carnivora, including
anteating bears, hyaenas, and viverrids.
Ant-eating, or myrmecophagous, species share a number of specializations.  The most obvious
is an elongate, tube-like snout that can be more easily probed into the tunnels of termite mounds.
The snout also contains an extremely long and sticky tongue, with which the numerous insects
are caught and brought into the mouth.  The teeth of ant-eating mammals are reduced or absent
(perhaps to eliminate the chance of biting one’s tongue).  Because getting at termites often
requires digging, most ant-eating mammals have fossorial adaptations (i.e., for burrowing), such
as strong claws and forelimbs.
Compare the skulls of the giant anteater, aardvark, and aardwolf.  What adaptations for ant-
eating can you observe in these skulls?
Infraclass Eutheria (Placentalia)
Order Xenarthra
Xenarthrans are a group of unusual mammals from the Americas, originally from South
America.  Despite their varied specializations, all xenarthrans share a number of derived features.
The one that gives them their name is the possession of xenarthrous vertebrae.  The lumbar
vertebrae of xenarthrans possess additional articulations not found in other mammals.  Note these
xenarthrous joints on an illustration from your textbook.  Xenarthrans are sometimes referred to
as edentates, meaning toothless, but whereas anteaters are toothless, sloths and armadillos
possess teeth, although their teeth have no enamel.
Family Megalonychidae and Family Bradypodidae
Sloths are members of these two families.  Both genera of living sloths (Choloepus and
Bradypus, the two-toed and three-toed sloths, respectively) are slow moving, herbivorous
creatures that hang from branches by their curved claws and munch leaves all day.  Algae
growing in their fur provide them with some camouflage in the foliage. Even though their teeth
are simple, sloths are able to digest leaves, thanks to a multi-chambered stomach that contains
cellulose-digesting bacteria.
Fossil sloths include a number of ground-dwelling species, some of which became very large.
The two genera of living sloths have long been classified in the Family Bradypodidae, but a
number of studies have determined that Choloepus is actually more closely related to some of the
ground sloths and should be placed in the Family Megalonychidae.
Examine the skull of Choloepus. Note that the peg-like teeth have no enamel (just dentine) and
are difficult to identify as premolars, molars, etc., so it is difficult to determine their dental
formulae. In fact, the teeth that appear to be canines are likely to be something else, perhaps
incisors. The upper “canines” of sloths sit in front of the lower “canines” when the jaws are
closed. Look at the skull of an opossum, wolf, or other mammal with typical canines, and notice
that the upper canines are placed behind the lower ones when the jaws are closed.


18
Family Dasypodidae
Armadillos are distinguished by their armor, composed of bony dermal scutes covered by horny
scales.  Armadilloes are generally fossorial and omnivorous, eating mainly invertebrates.  One
species, the nine-banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus) is found in the southern United
States, but most armadillo species are South American.
Examine the skull of an armadillo. Like sloths, armadillos have peg-like teeth with no enamel
and little indication as to the dental formula. The specimens in this lab come from the nine-
banded armadillo.
Family Myrmecophagidae
The three species of anteaters are found in Central and South America.  The smallest, the silky
anteater, is about the size of a squirrel, but the largest, the giant anteater, reaches the size of a
large dog.
Examine the cast of a skull of a giant anteater (Myrmecophaga tetradactyla). The skull is
toothless and has the characteristic long, thin shape found in ant-eating mammal species.
Order Tubulidentata
Family Orycteropodidae
The single species of aardvark (Orycteropus afer) is a mammal whose relationship to other
mammals is not well understood.  Aardvarks are found in Africa where they feed on termites that
live in concrete-hard castle-like mounds.  Aardvarks are legendary diggers; one man who
grabbed an aardvark by the tail in order to catch it within minutes found himself waist deep in
the hard sun-baked African earth, as the aardvark had attempted to burrow to safety.
Aardvarks are distinguished from other mammals by their tubular dentine (the source of the
name for the order); tiny tubes pierce the dentine in their peg-like teeth. Examine the skull of an
aardvark under a dissecting scope and see if you can see these tubules in the tooth surface.


19
O. Insectivora
A variety of mammals have been classified as "insectivorans," largely because they were small,
primitive, or of mysterious affinities.  The Order Insectivora is now restricted to lipotyphlans
(and the order is sometimes called Lipotyphla).  Lipotyphlans are distinguished from other
putative insectivorans by the lack of a caecum on the colon.  (The caecum is a blind pouch; it is
often enlarged in herbivorous mammals like rabbits.)
Apart from the caecum, few characters unite lipotyphlans as a monophyletic group.  These
include reduction of the pubic symphysis and reduction of the jugal, as well as some other traits
that are found in some members of other orders.  Some recent molecular studies have challenged
the monophyly of Insectivora.
F. Erinaceidae
Erinaceids are best known as hedgehogs, although some members that have no spines are known
as moonrats.  They are found throughout the Old World.  Examine the skull of a hedgehog.  Note
that the molars are bunodont with a prominent hypocone.  Like marsupials, hedgehogs have
palatal vacuities.
F. Soricidae
Shrews are small predatory mammals that are found on every continent except Australia and
Antarctica.  Shrews have very high metabolic rates and must eat often in order to provide enough
energy to live.  This is partly due to their small size, which results in a high surface area-volume
ratio that causes them to lose heat rapidly.  Some of the smallest mammals in the world are
shrews, weighing as little as a few grams.  Shrews have large, distinctive incisors, simple
premolars (often referred to as unicuspids), and dilambdodont molars.
Local species: Blarina brevicauda, short-tailed shrew
Local species: Sorex cinereus, masked shrew
Local species: Sorex palustris, water shrew
New Jersey is the home to several species of shrews, two of which are displayed here.  Blarina
brevicauda is the most common shrew that you might encounter, as it often falls prey to cats.
Blarina is larger than Sorex and has more mole-like features, such as no visible ear pinnae, very
small eyes, and dark grey fur.  Blarina hunts under the cover of leaf litter and lawns, searching
for insects but also hunting prey as large as mice and voles (which are larger than the shrew).
Short-tailed shrews are unusual for mammals in that they are venomous, producing a neurotoxin
that paralyzes small prey.
There are several species of Sorex present in New Jersey, which can be difficult to sort out, but
only the relatively common masked shrew is represented in our teaching collection.


20
Note the red pigment on the teeth of the shrews.  The function of this pigment (from an iron
compound), if any, is unknown, but it is found only in the subfamily Soricinae, to which all New
World shrews belong.
F. Talpidae
This family actually includes three different types of animals, moles, shrew moles (which are
less fossorial), and desmans (which are semiaquatic).  Moles are specialized for subterranean
life, i.e., they spend most of their lives burrowing through the earth, rarely coming to the surface.
They are found throughout the holarctic region.
Talpids all share an unusual feature, a humeroclavicular joint.  In most mammals, the shoulder
joint is formed only by an articulation between the head of the humerus and the glenoid fossa of
the scapula.  In talpids, the humeral head also articulates with the clavicle.  One consequence (or
possibly cause) of this unusual anatomy is that talpids use a "breaststroke" motion when they dig.
Most mammals are "scratch" diggers, moving their limbs beneath them, as when a dog digs
Local species: Scalopus aquaticus, Eastern mole
Local species: Parascalops brewerii, hairy-tailed mole
Local species: Condylura cristata, star-nosed mole
Three species of moles are found in New Jersey.  The star-nosed mole is readily distinguished by
the ring of tentacles around the tip of its snout, which are very sensitive to touch.  Star-nosed
moles burrow but also are known to swim in streams looking for prey.  The Eastern and hairy-
tailed moles are more typical and look similar; the Eastern mole can be distinguished by the
absence of fur on its tail.
F. Tenrecidae
F. Solenodontidae
F. Chrysochloridae
These three families are currently not represented in today's lab.
Tenrecids are a family of diverse insectivorans found in Madagascar and Africa.  Tenrecs have
undergone an adaptive radiation in Madagascar, including forms that resemble hedgehogs and
opossums.  The only African tenrecids are the semiaquatic otter shrews.
Solenodon is a rare insectivoran now found only in Haiti, where introduced mammals and hapitat
destruction by humans threaten it with extinction.  It is large for an insectivoran (about the size
of a muskrat).  It also produces venomous saliva, like some soricids.
Chrysochlorids, or golden moles, are native to Africa.  Like true moles in the family Talpidae,
they are subterranean burrowers feeding on invertebrates.  They differ from talpids in that they
are scratch diggers.


21
O. Macroscelidea
F. Macroscelididae
Elephant shrews, as their name suggests, were once included in the Insectivora, but they
are now considered to be only distantly related at best.  In fact, some workers consider this group
to be related to rodents and rabbits.  Hence, they are now placed in their own order.  Elephant
shrews take their first name from the fact that their snouts are long and somewhat mobile (though
nothing like an elephant's trunk).  They are generally terrestrial, and some have adaptations for
bipedal hopping (like a little kangaroo).  They are found in parts of Africa.
Examine the skull of an elephant shrew.  Note the long-snouted skull and some of the
features that distinguish it from lipotyphlans: complete zygomatic arch, large orbits, large
auditory bulla.  Examine the teeth under a microscope.  The molars are squarish, with a large
hypocone on the upper teeth, and they are lophodont and high-crowned, resembling the teeth of
some large hoofed mammals.
O. Scandentia
F. Tupaiidae
Like the previous group, tree shrews were previously included in the Insectivora.  Some
workers consider tree shrews to be closely related to primates, and they are usually considered to
resemble the ancestral primate.  Tree shrews are small, squirrel-like animals that live above the
ground in trees and low-lying vegetation.  They are generally omnivorous, although fruit forms
the majority of their diet.  They are found in certain tropical forests of Southeast Asia.
Examine the skull of a tree shrew.  Note the complete postorbital bar, a primate-like
feature.  Examine the teeth; the molars have the primitive tribosphenic form, with only a small
hypocone.


22
O. Primates
The Order Primates includes humans and the animals commonly referred to as apes and
monkeys.  Several characters diagnose primates, including the presence of a petrosal bulla,
reduction of incisors to two upper and lower on each side, and the presence of a postorbital bar.
Primates show great diversity in diet and locomotion, but most are arboreal to at least some
degree.  Unlike most mammals, most primates are diurnal rather than nocturnal, and most have
highly developed vision that is stereoscopic and usually color.  Many primate species are social,
meaning that they habitually live in groups of multiple individuals.  Primates are generally found
in tropical regions.
There are two major divisions of primates, the Strepsirhini and the Haplorhini.
Strepsirhines, sometimes referred to as prosimians, share many primitive features, but they also
share some derived features, such as the formation of a tooth comb from the lower incisors and
canines.  This tooth comb is used for grooming.  The term strepsirhine refers to "split nose,"
describing the primitive form of the nose in this group, which resembles that of a dog.
Haplorhines include tarsiers, monkeys, apes, and humans.
F. Lemuridae
Strepsirhines appear to have undergone a significant adaptive radiation on the large
oceanic island of Madagascar.  The most diverse family of Malagasy (i.e., from Madagascar)
strepsirhines is the Lemuridae.  Examine the lemur skull and note its primitive features in
comparison to a monkey skull.  What is the dental formula of this lemur?
F. Tarsiidae
Tarsiers are small, nocturnal, insectivorous primates.  They have enormous eyes and long
spindly legs specialized for leaping from branches.  Examine the skull of a tarsier.  Note the huge
orbits, and note the postorbital septum.  This is the "wall" of bone separating the orbit from the
temporal fossa, a feature that tarsiers share with monkeys, apes, and humans.  The teeth of
tarsiers include standard tribosphenic molars.
F. Callitrichidae and F. Cebidae
Haplorhines include the tarsiers and the Anthropoidea, which includes monkeys, apes,
and humans.  Anthropoids are divided into two subgroups, the Platyrrhini and the Catarrhini.
Platyrrhines are the New World monkeys, whereas catarrhines are the Old World monkeys and
apes (including humans).
There are two families of platyrrhines, cebids and callitrichids, both found only in South
and Central America.  Callitrichids include the marmosets and tamarins, small monkeys that are
generally insectivorous.  Cebids include larger New World monkeys like howler monkeys and
spider monkeys.  Cebids lack opposable thumbs, but many have prehensile tails.  Both cebids
and callitrichids possess three premolars, but callitrichids have only two molars.


23
Examine the display of platyrrhine skulls.  The smaller skulls at the top are callitrichids,
whereas the larger skulls near the bottom are cebids.  Can you determine the dental formula of
these animals?
F. Cercopithecidae
Old World monkeys are placed in the Family Cercopithecidae.  Cercopithecids are united
by the presence of an anterior lower premolar that shears against the back of the canine in a
derived manner.  Identify this tooth on one of the macaque specimens.  Cercopithecids, like New
World monkeys, often have long tails, but the tails are never prehensile.  Cercopithecid molars
are generally bilophodont, with two transverse crests.  Examine the teeth of a macaque to
confirm this.  What is the dental formula of a cercopithecid?
F. Hylobatidae
Apes and humans are placed together in the Hominoidea.  Hominoids share a number of
characters, including the absence of a tail.  Hylobatids, or gibbons, constitute one of the two
families of hominoids.  Compare the gibbon skull to that of a macaque.  Gibbons are
characterized by their elongate limbs, especially their long arms that they use to swing
themselves from branch to branch, a type of locomotion termed brachiation.
F. Hominidae
Great apes (orangutans, gorillas, and chimpanzees) and humans were formerly separated
into the families Pongidae and Hominidae, respectively.  A number of lines of evidence,
including DNA, support the idea that humans are closely related to African apes (gorillas and
chimpanzees) and that humans therefore should be placed in the same family as the great apes.
Because it is older than the name Pongidae, the family name Hominidae is used for this family.
Examine the casts of skulls of a female and male gorilla.  Gorillas exhibit a striking
degree of secondary sexual dimorphism in certain features.  Note the larger size and the
prominent sagittal crest of the male relative to the female.
Compare the gorilla skulls to that of a human.  What differences can you see between
them?  Compare these skulls to those of the early human relatives Australopithecus, Homo
erectus, and Homo neanderthalensis (possibly a variety of Homo sapiens).  Note particularly the
differences in size of the braincase, development of a chin, development of brow ridges, and the
length of the face.
O. Dermoptera
F. Cynocephalidae
Flying lemurs, or colugos, are arboreal gliding mammals of Southeast Asia once included
in the Insectivora.  Colugos glide using flaps of skin stretched between their limbs, similar to that


24
of a flying squirrel.  Unlike flying squirrels, colugos also have a web of skin stretched between
their fingers that contributes to the gliding surface.  This is a feature that they share with bats, to
which they may be closely related.
Dermopterans have dilambdodont molars but actually feed mainly on leaves.  Upper
incisors are reduced, and the lower incisors have distinctive spine-like projections like the tines
of a comb, which they use for grooming their fur.  Examine a colugo skull and observe this tooth
comb.
O. Chiroptera
Bats are the only mammals that truly fly.  They have wings formed by stretching a
membrane of skin between their fingers.  This membrane also extends between the limbs and to
the tail.  Bats are one of the largest orders of mammals, representing about 25% of all living
species.
Suborder Megachiroptera
F. Pteropodidae
Examine the skull of an Old World fruit bat.  Note the dog-like rostrum that inspired the
other common name for these bats, "flying foxes."  The long rostrum, with its large orbits, is a
primitive feature for these crepuscular bats, which cannot echolocate (with one exception) and
which rely on vision.  All bats retain a claw on the thumb, but megabats also have a claw on digit
II; this is another primitive feature.  The teeth of pteropodids, on the other hand, are derived.
Note the simple cheek teeth with more or less flat surfaces.  Articulate the lower jaw with the
skull; note that the teeth do not actually occlude.  These teeth are specialized for pulping fruit.
The bats squish the fruit between their teeth and swallow the juice; the pulp is spit out.  (Never
stand below a fruit bat roost without covering your head!)  One specialized subfamily of
pteropodids feeds on nectar.
Suborder Microchiroptera
By far, most bats are in this suborder, and they are often referred to as microbats.  They
are generally much smaller than megabats.  Their skulls are quite derived, with very short faces
modified for echolocation.  Many microbats have lost their incisors, which would interfere with
pulses generated through the mouth, whereas others emit pulses through the nose and have
elaborate facial features that focus the pulses.  Microbats are also derived in that they lack a claw
on digit II.  The teeth of microbats are dilambdodont and are considered to be primitive.  Many
microbats are insectivorous, but there are microbats that feed on other things, including fruit,
fish, frogs, nectar, and blood.


25
F. Vespertilionidae
All of New Jersey's bats belong to this generally insectivorous family of north temperate
regions, the evening bats.  New Jersey is home to a number of species, but only two are available
for today's lab.
Local species: Eptesicus fuscus, big brown bat
Local species: Lasiurus borealis, red bat


26
Order Carnivora
F. Canidae
Examine the skulls of various canids in lab.  Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) are
thought to be derived from gray wolves (Canis lupus).  Compare the skulls of a gray wolf and a
dog.  Note the prominent "brow" of the dog, a feature that distinguishes dogs and wolves.  The
skull of a red wolf, a rare species from North America, is also on display.  Note also that the
cheek teeth of canids are less specialized for carnivory than those of cats.
Three wild canids are found in New Jersey.  Coyotes (Canis latrans) are the largest local
wild canids.  There are also two species of foxes.
Local species
Canis latrans
coyote
Vulpes vulpes (or Vulpes fulva)
red fox
Urocyon cinereoargenteus
gray fox
Examine the skulls and illustrations of red and gray foxes in lab.  These two species are
readily distinguished by their coats, but their skulls are also distinguishable by the shape of the
ridges forming the sagittal crest.  Conveniently, the ridges in Vulpes look like a "V", whereas the
ridges in Urocyon form a "U".
F. Ursidae
Bears are large omnivores found mainly in the Northern Hemisphere, the main exception
being the spectacled bear of South America.  Examine the skull of a black bear and note the
bunodont cheek teeth.
Local species
Usrus americanus
black bear
F. Procyonidae
Procyonids include a number of New World species, but only the raccoon (Procyon
lotor) is native to New Jersey.  Examine the skull of a raccoon.  Note the bunodont,
quadritubercular molars.
Procyon lotor
raccoon
F. Mustelidae
Mustelids include a variety of smaller carnivorans with elongate bodies.  New Jersey is
home to several mustelid species, but only three are represented in lab.


27
Local species
Mustela vison
mink
Mephitis mephitis
skunk
Lutra canadensis
river otter
Note the reduced molars of the mink compared to the skunk, and the sharp shearing
blades formed by the minks teeth.
We also have a skull of a European badger (Meles meles).  Compare that with the other
mustelids.  Note that, like other mustelids, the badger retains only one molar on each side, but
this molar has become elongated and bunodont to deal with the omnivorous diet of this animal.
F. Felidae
A number of cats are represented in today's lab, although none are local species.  Cats all
have similar short-faced skulls with highly carnivorous dental adaptations.
F. Hyaenidae
Hyenas include three genera of animals specialized for crushing bones and
hypercarnivory.  However, the one hyena represented in lab is the fourth genus, Proteles, the
aardwolf, which specializes in eating termites.
F. Viverridae
Viverrids are known only from Eurasia and Africa but are similar to mustelids in being
smaller carnivorans.  Two examples of viverrids are given in lab, a binturong (Paradoxurus) and
a palm civet (Nandinia).


28
Lagomorphs and Rodents I
The two orders examined in this lab, rodents and lagomorphs, are at least superficially similar
and probably related.  Both of these groups have distinctive, enlarged, ever-growing incisors,
which are referred to as gliriform.  Only the anterior aspect of the incisors is covered by enamel;
the effect is that the incisors are self-sharpening.
O. Lagomorpha
There are two families of living lagomorphs, one of which is represented in today's lab.
Lagomorphs look superficially like rodents, but they can be distinguished by the presence of a
small second pair of upper incisors behind the large gliriform pair.  Lagomorphs are also
distinguished by the possession of a fenestrated skull, where parts of the skull have a thin, lattice-
like appearance.  All lagomorphs have hypsodont teeth with no roots.
F. Leporidae
Leporids include rabbits and hares.  Examine the skulls of various leporids to observe the
diagnostic features of lagomorphs.  Leporids are unique among mammals in possessing a joint
within the skull, encircling the skull just in front of the ear region.  The slight movements
allowed by this joint are thought to help absorb the shock produced by the bounding gait of
leporids.
Local species:
Sylvilagus floridanus
Eastern cottontail
New Jersey is actually home to a number of leporids, including two different genera, but the
Eastern cottontail is the only one represented by material in this lab.
O. Rodentia
Rodents are the most diverse order of mammals.  Rodents account for 40% of mammalian
diversity, and 25% of mammalian diversity is found in one family, the Muridae.  Rodents
possess only a single pair of gliriform incisors in the upper and lower jaws.  Notice the
orientation of the glenoid fossa on the skulls of various rodents.  The jaw articulation is designed
to allow propalinal (fore and aft) movement of the jaw, a distinctive feature of rodents.
Rodents have traditionally been identified and classified according to the arrangement of their
jaw muscles, which is reflected by distinctive morphologies of the skull and jaw.  Four types of
rodent skulls can be identified:
Protrogomorphous: This represents the primitive condition, where the muscles have not
expanded significantly from the positions found in other mammals.  None of the rodents in this
lab are protrogomorphous, and only one living species of rodent is protrogomorphous.


29
Sciuromorphous: The lateral portion of the masseter in this condition expands onto the anterior
aspect of the zygomatic arch, which is expanded into a flattened plate.  Examine a beaver skull to
see a good example of sciuromorphy.
Hystricomorphous: In this condition, another portion of the masseter, the medial masseter,
expands and actually passes through an enlarged infraorbital foramen.  Good examples of this
condition can be observed in the skulls of the porcupine and the nutria.
Myomorphous: This condition appears to combine the previous two.  The result is a flattened
anterior aspect of the zygomatic arch, with a somewhat enlarged, keyhole-shaped infraorbital
foramen.  A good example of this condition can be seen in the muskrat.
There is little agreement as to how these conditions evolved and how often.  Only myomorphy is
considered to be a derived feature characteristic of a monophyletic group.  The other types may
have evolved more than once, and different groups that have similar skull morphologies may not
in fact be closely related.
Another feature that is used to distinguish groups of rodents is the morphology of the jaw.  Two
conditions are observed, sciurognathy and hystricognathy.  In hystricognathy, the angular
process is in a more lateral position relative to the alveoli of the incisors.  Use the diagram in
your book (Figure 18-3) to figure out the distinction between these two morphologies.
Hystricognathy is considered to be a shared derived condition, whereas sciurognathy is primitive.
For today's lab, we'll cover the families of sciuromorphous and hystricomorphous rodents; next
week we'll look at myomorphous families and all of the local species of rodents.
F. Aplodontidae
Mountain beavers are found in the Pacific Northwest.  They are the only living
protrogomorphous rodents, and some have argued that they have reverted to this condition from
one of the others.  They have distinctive peg-like teeth and broad, flat skulls.
F. Sciuridae
Sciurids include tree squirrels, ground squirrels, chipmunks, and marmots.  Examine the
representative sciurids and note their sciuromorphous and sciurognathous morphology.  Note the
dental formula; at least one premolar is present in the upper and lower jaws.  The teeth are
relatively low-crowned.
F. Castoridae
Beavers are one of the largest rodents in body size.  Examine the sciuromorphous and
sciurognathous skull of a beaver.  Note the presence of a single premolar in the upper and lower
jaws and the high-crowned, lophodont cheek teeth.
F. Geomyidae


30
Pocket gophers are subterranean burrowers.  Many burrowing rodents, including geomyids,
actually rely on their incisors for digging, rather than on their limbs.  Geomyids are
sciuromorphous and sciurognathous.  Geomyids have hypsodont cheek teeth, with three simple
cylindrical molars and a large 8-shaped premolar in each half of the upper and lower jaw.
F. Heteromyidae
Pocket gophers are thought to be closely related to heteromyids, the kangaroo rats and pocket
mice.  Kangaroo rats have saltatorial or ricochetal locomotion, i.e., they jump around on their
hind legs, not unlike their marsupial namesake.  Both heteromyids and geomyids possess fur-
lined cheek pouches, as well as being similar in having sciuromorphous skulls, sciurognathous
jaws, and fairly simple hypsodont cheek teeth.  Examine the teeth of the kangaroo rat and the
pocket mouse.  Note the more complex, two-lobed molars of the pocket mouse compared to
those of the kangaroo rat.  Note also the enlarged auditory bullae of the kangaroo rat.
F. Dipodidae
We have only a skin of a dipodid, that of a jumping mouse.  Dipodids, including jumping mice,
jerboas, and birch mice, include a number of saltatorial forms, convergent on the similar
heteromyids.  Dipodids, however, are not closely related to heteromyids.  Dipodids are
hystricomorphous and sciurognathous.
Suborder Hystricognathi
Two families of hystricognathous rodents are represented in lab.  Hystricognathous rodents
comprise their own suborder, the Hystricognathi.  All hystricognaths are also hystricomorphous.
F. Erithizontidae
New World porcupines are included in this family, including our own local species.  Note the
relatively low-crowned lophodont cheek teeth, including one upper and lower premolar.
F. Myocastoridae
The nutria is also a local species, but it was introduced to this area accidentally by humans who
wanted to raise nutrias for their fur.  Nutrias are superficially beaver-like, although they have
laterally compressed tails, instead of horizontally flattened tails.  Note the high-crowned
lophodont cheek teeth and compare them to those of the beaver.  Examine the jaw of a nutria and
note the near absence of the coronoid process.
F. Hydrochaeridae
The capybara is the world's largest rodent, with the largest weighing in around 175 lbs.  They are
ecologically equivalent to small hippos, grazing on land, swimming in the water, and living in
large groups.  Note the extremely lophodont cheek teeth.


31
Rodents II
Today's lab covers the murids and all of the local species of rodents that you need to know.
F. Sciuridae
Local species:
Sciurus carolinensis
eastern gray squirrel
Tamiasciurus hudsonicus
red squirrel
Tamias striatus
eastern chipmunk
Marmota monax
woodchuck
Glaucomys volans
southern flying squirrel
Glaucomys sabrinus
northern flying squirrel
F. Castoridae
Local species:
Castor canadensis
beaver
F. Dipodidae
Local species:
Napaeozapus insignis
woodland jumping mouse
F. Erithizontidae
Local species:
Erethizon dorsatum
porcupine
F. Myocastoridae
Local species:
Myocastor coypus
nutria (introduced)
F. Muridae
Murids are the most diverse family of mammals, including the various mice, rats, and voles.  All
murids are myomorphous.  Use the key included for Massachusetts "mice" to identify different
local species of murids.
Local species:
Peromyscus leucopus
white-footed mouse
Synaptomys cooperi
southern bog lemming
Microtus pennsylvanicus
meadow vole
Microtus (Pitymys) pinetorum
pine vole
Clethrionomys gapperi
red-backed vole
Ondatra zibethica
muskrat
Rattus norwegicus
Norway rat
Neotoma floridanus
Eastern woodrat


32
O. Artiodactyla
Artiodactyls are "even-toed" ungulates (hoofed mammals).  Their feet are paraxonic; this
means that the axis of the foot runs between digits 3 and 4.  Artiodactyls have a distinctive
astragalus with a double-pulley form.  Examine the astragalus of a fossil artiodactyl that we have
on display.  Artiodactyls have other diagnostic features, including absence of an alisphenoid
canal.
F. Suidae and F. Tayassuidae
Suids are pigs.  Pigs have bunodont teeth and are omnivorous.  Tayassuids, peccaries and
javelinas, are similar to pigs in their morphology and habits.  Note the large alveoli for the
canines in the pig.  The canines of pigs flare out laterally, whereas those of peccaries are straight.
Note the canines of the juvenile peccary skull.
F. Cervidae
Cervids, deer and their relatives, are distinguished by the presence of antlers, usually in
males but sometimes in both sexes.  Antlers differ from other skull ornaments in that they are
formed from bone initially covered by velvet and are shed annually.  Examine the skull and
antlers of a deer and a moose.  Note the selenodont dentition.  Note also the depression in the
area of the lacrimal bone, where a scent gland is located.
Local species:
Odocoileus virginianus
whitetail deer
F. Antilocapridae
Pronghorns, or pronghorn "antelope", are distinguished by the presence of a pronghorn
head ornament, which consists of a bony core covered by a keratinous sheath that is shed
annually.  Once a very diverse family in North America, antilocaprids are represented today by a
single species found in the prairies of western North America.  This animal is also one of the
fastest mammals on earth.
F. Bovidae
Bovids are the most diverse family of artiodactyls, including cattle, sheep, goats, and
antelopes.  (Note: This does not include the pronghorn "antelope" of western North America.)
Horns are a diagnostic feature of bovids; they can be present in one or both sexes.  Horns consist
of a bony core covered by a horny (keratinous) sheath.  Examine the skull of a bull or cow.  Note
the horn cores and examine the sheath.  Note the selenodont dentition.
O. Cetacea
Cetaceans include whales and dolphins, mammals highly adapted to aquatic life.  We
won't go into families of cetaceans here.  Examine the skull of a Risso's dolphin.  See if you can


33
identify the skull bones.  The nostrils are placed on top of the head, so that the surrounding bones
are modified in a manner called telescoping.  Examine the forelimb of the dolphin (hindlimbs are
absent in living cetaceans).  Note the paddle-like form and identify the bones.  Note that
cetaceans have hyperphalangy, the increase in number of the phalanges.  Examine the vertebrae
of the dolphin and note how simple they are in form relative to terrestrial mammals.
O. Perissodactyla
Perissodactyls are the "odd-toed" hoofed mammals, including horses, rhinoceroses, and
tapirs.  The axis of the foot runs through the middle (third) digit of the feet.  Perissodactyls also
have a diagnostic astragalus, with a saddle-shaped facet for the navicular bone.  Examine the
fossil astragalus of a perissodactyl on display.
F. Equidae
Equids include horses and zebras.  The feet of horses are largely composed of a single
digit (digit 3), with vestiges of the second and fourth digits.  Horses have hypsodont, lophodont
teeth.  Examine the skull of a horse.
F. Rhinocerotidae
Rhinoceroses are distinguished by their horns, which are formed from keratin (essentially
matted hair) and have no bony core.  Rhinoceros teeth have distinctive "pi" shape to them.
Examine the specimen of a fossil rhinoceros (actually a member of a different family, which had
no horns) and note the shape of the teeth.
O. Hyracoidea
F. Procaviidae
Hyraxes (or hyraces) are a group of rabbit-sized mammals thought to be related to either
perissodactyls or elephants.  Examine the skull of a hyrax.  Note the "pi" shaped teeth,
convergent with those of rhinoceroses.  Note the supraorbital process, which is formed partly by
the parietal bone, a distinctive feature of hyraxes.
O. Proboscidea
F. Elephantidae
Elephants have many distinctive features related to their size and their trunks.  Examine
the jaw of a baby mammoth (a fossil).  Note the lophodont teeth with many lophs.  The reddish
material on the outside of the tooth is cementum, a substance that helps resist abrasion by grasses
that the animal ate in life.  Mammoths and Asian elephants are very similar.  Note that only one


34
tooth is functional in each half of the jaw.  As one tooth wears out, the next comes in behind and
the old one is pushed forward.
