--- 
source: 2004-5.pdf
--- 

DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND
HABITAT USE OF THE OTTER IN
RELATION TO LAND USE IN THE
ARAGLIN VALLEY, SOUTHERN IRELAND
Paola Ottino and Paul Giller
ABSTRACT
The distribution, density, diet and habitat use of the otter (Lutra lutra) were examined in the
Araglin Valley, in counties Cork, Tipperary and Waterford. Otter signs (tracks, spraints, anal
secretions, holts, etc.) and environmental conditions (river depth, river width, ﬂow regime,
vegetation cover, etc.) were recorded at 112 sites across three habitat types (agriculture, moorland
and forestry) in the river valley.
Three deﬁnite home range boundaries were delineated by high levels of sprainting and
scraping, and results indicated the presence of six or seven otters. Signiﬁcant correlations were
recorded between otter signs and river depth, river width, lying-up availability and presence of
holts, but no trends were found between otter signs and vegetation cover or ﬂow velocity. A
positive relationship was recorded between spraints and vegetation cover in the agriculture and
moorland habitats, but a negative correlation was found in the forested sites.
Percentage frequency of occurrence, relative percentage of frequency, and percentage bulk
(Sc%) were calculated for twelve food categories based on seasonal data sets. Fish (mainly salmonids
and eels) were the predominant food category in each season (Sc%=70.03). Other signiﬁcant food
categories included small quantities of mammals, birds, frogs and crayﬁsh (both in February and
March). Considerable variation in otter diet was revealed and was related to differences among
three different habitat types and to the location of the home range. In home range 3, ﬁsh prey were
relatively scarce, while birds and frogs were more important. In contrast, ﬁsh was the more
important food in home ranges 1 and 2.
The trophic niche breadth of otter, evaluated using Levin’s index, varied little throughout the
study period, with a peak in spring/early summer and a minimum value in late autumn
(October–November).
Paola Ottino and Paul
Giller (corresponding
author: e-mail:
p.giller@ucc.ie),
Department of Zoology,
Ecology and Plant
Science, University
College Cork, Lee
Maltings, Prospect Row,
Cork Ireland.
Received 18 August
1999. Read 4 December
2003. Published 31 May
2004.
INTRODUCTION
The otter (Lutra lutra (L.)) has been described as a
‘ﬁsh specialist’ (Erlinge 1972; Wise et al. 1981;
Mason and Macdonald 1986). However several
studies suggested that the otter may be better
deﬁned as an opportunistic predator, with its
feeding
behaviour
being
dependent
on
the
availability of prey (e.g. Erlinge 1967; Jenkins et al.
1979; Erlinge and Jensen 1981; Gormally and
Fairley
1982;
Kruuk
and
Moorhouse
1990;
Breathnach and Fairley 1993; Carss 1995; Carss et
al. 1998). It is recognised as one of the top
predators in freshwater systems, and thus has the
potential
to
play
an
important
role
in
the
functioning of these systems. Prior to the ﬁrst
National Otter Survey (Chapman and Chapman
1982), little was known about the status of the
otter in Ireland. Stephens (1957) in The Otter
Report states that otters had drastically decreased in
the country since they were hunted, yet while
otters were still considered common (Fairley 1972)
the species was protected by the Wildlife Act in
the Republic of Ireland in 1976.
The national survey was undertaken from
January 1980 to February 1981 based on alternate
50km2 squares of the National Grid of Ireland
(Chapman
and
Chapman
1982).
Sites
were
spatially
distributed
at
5–8km
intervals
along
rivers, canals, lakes and coasts. Of the 2373 sites
surveyed, 2177 (91.7%) were found positive (based
on the presence of otter signs—see below). The
otter was more widespread on the west coast than
on the east coast, and the Burren, the Dublin area,
the River Barrow in County Carlow and the
lower
Blackwater
river
system
in
Munster
appeared to be relatively poor areas in comparison
with the rest of Ireland. In general the Irish
BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT: PROCEEDINGS OF THE ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY, VOL. 104B, NO. 1, 1–17 (2004).
© ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY
1


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
populations
of
otters
were
considered
inter-
nationally important.
On the basis of a later survey by Lunnon and
Reynolds (1991) at some of the original survey
sites, no signiﬁcant changes in the otter population
were apparent over the intervening years. Further
analyses have been carried out by various authors
on a more local scale. Kyne et al. (1990) found that
although otter signs were generally widespread in
the Connemara bogland, there was no evidence of
otters in many stretches during an exceptionally
dry summer and the average number of positive
sites was very low. On the other hand, in the
Munster Blackwater river catchment, O’Sullivan
(1991) and Smiddy (1993) described strong and
relatively stable otter populations with no evidence
of decline since the original survey.
The vast majority of such surveys are based on
data provided by otter signs, particularly faeces
(spraints), but the use of spraint density as an
indicator of population status, distribution and
habitat utilisation of otters has been the subject of
some
debate.
Mason
and
Macdonald
(1987)
demonstrated a signiﬁcant relationship between
mean number of spraints and the percentage of
positive
sites
and
concluded
that
‘surveys
of
spraints,
using
standard
methodology,
give
a
reliable picture of the distribution of otters’.
Conroy and French (1987; 1991) suggested that
the relationship between otter density and level of
marking may be inﬂuenced by many factors: for
this reason sprainting intensity data should be used
with care. Under particular conditions of low
population density, low sprainting activity would
occur (Ottino 1995). In addition, otters defending
territorial boundaries often defecate in the water
(Kruuk et al. 1986). Kruuk et al. (1986) studied
otters in a marine habitat and found that seasonal
changes in marking level should be considered. No
correlation was found in this study between otter
activity and intensity of sprainting, even if spraints
were associated with holts, freshwater pools and
various other features. The presence of good
bankside cover and mature riparian trees may also
be important factors (Jenkins and Burrows 1980;
O’Sullivan
1992).
Other
studies
have
found
relationships
between
sprainting
activity
and
riparian vegetation in Greece (Macdonald and
Mason 1982a; 1985), Spain (Adrian et al. 1985;
Delibes et al. 1991), Germany (Prauser 1985),
England (Macdonald and Mason 1988), Wales
(Macdonald and Mason 1983) and Scotland (Bas et
al. 1984). It should be borne in mind that otter
signs may relate to habitat features and not
necessarily to the otters themselves (see Thom et al.
1998).
Despite this wealth of information, more
fundamental research is required to determine the
precise ecological and habitat requirements of the
otter. At present, the minimum amount of cover
and food required to support a population is
unknown. Also, there is no information on the
impact of the forestry and other land use on the
otter, and very little is known of their habitat use
in relation to different landscape types (woodland,
moorland, farmland, etc.).
We can only guess at the total population size
of the otter in Ireland, even if we know that, in
this country, the otter is widespread and common.
Attempts at estimating population density on a
local scale may contribute to better estimates of the
national population. This study adopts such an
approach and examines otter distribution, home
range, diet and density in relation to season, habitat
features and land use in a single river basin, the
Araglin Valley, County Cork.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
STUDY AREA
The study was carried out between October 1995
and June 1996 along the entire Araglin Valley and
on two of its major tributaries, the River Douglas
catchment (Kilworth Forest) and the Glenﬁnish
River, which form part of the Araglin Catchment
Research Study Area (Fig. 1). The Araglin Valley
(R8804) lies within 30m to 500m above sea level
and is a designated Natural Heritage Area, situated
in southern Munster in the counties of Cork,
Tipperary and Waterford. The valley has been
subject to intensive study over the past decade
(Clenaghan 1996; Clenaghan et al. 1998; Giller et
al. 1993; 1997; Elso and Giller 2001), and there is
considerable
baseline
information
on
water
chemistry, macroinvertebrate communities and ﬁsh
populations as well as land use and habitats. Earlier
work
on
otters
in
the
Araglin
Valley
was
conducted by Chapman and Chapman (1982),
who identiﬁed otters present at one of the two
sites surveyed, and by O’Sullivan (1991), who
identiﬁed otter presence at nine of the eleven sites
surveyed. The majority of the streams in the study
catchment are fast-ﬂowing and are subject to spate
conditions.
The Araglin river, a 29km tributary of the
River
Blackwater,
rises
in
moorland
in
the
Knockmealdown Mountains and runs through
rough pasture and some improved pasture, often
associated with mixed forest such as beech (Fagus
sylvatica), ash (Fraxinus excelsior) and oak (Quercus
spp) and plantation forests of spruce (Picea spp) and
pine species (Pinus spp). The lower Araglin River
is 10m wide. In the middle segments the width
is within the range 5–8m, and near the headwaters
it is 2–3m wide. The main Araglin river has a pH
ranging
from
7.20
to
7.52,
but
the
upper
headwaters are considered acid, having a pH
2


OTTER DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND HABITAT USE IN RELATION TO LAND USE
Fig. 1—Map of the Araglin catchment study area, showing home ranges and holts of otters.
approaching 5 (Wallace 1995). The underlying
geology of the area is predominantly Old Red
Sandstone and slates, with some gravely deposits.
The River Douglas is 3–5m wide, and its four
tributaries are 1–2m wide. The parent geology is
predominantly Old Red Sandstone with a layer of
yellow-grey
sandstone
and
some
argillaceous
sandstone. Within the catchment the pH ranges
from 5.0 to 8.0, and the most acid sites are located
in the headwaters of the easternmost tributary
(Cleneghan et al. 1998). The catchment area is
21.5km2, of which 8km2 is covered by a conifer
plantation (Kilworth Forest), 5km2 is made up of
agricultural land, largely found below and to the
east of the forest, and the remainder is moorland
lying above the forest. Average stream gradient is
30m km−1 or 3%. Three of the main tributary
streams originate on moorland before ﬂowing
through the conifer plantation, whereas the fourth
rises within the forest itself. All the streams then
merge to form the main River Douglas, before
ﬂowing out of the plantation.
The Glenﬁnish River is a second order
tributary
of
the
Araglin
River.
The
riparian
vegetation is dominated by willow (Salix spp), ash
and sycamore (Acer pseudoplatanus) and is often
associated with alder (Alnus glutinosa), oak, birch
(Betula
spp),
hazel
(Corylus
avellana),
bramble
(Rubus fruticosus) and woodbine (Lonicera spp).
Coniferous afforestation mainly occurs in the
southern part of the catchment area. Agricultural
pasture borders the bank of the lower course of the
river. The width of the Genﬁnish River is 1–4m.
The parent geology is mainly red slates with
gravelly drift, and the pH ranges from 6.65 to 6.98
(Giller et al. 1997).
OTTER DISTRIBUTION, HABITAT USE AND
DENSITY
The study area was divided into a total of one
hundred and twelve, 500-metre reaches of river for
surveying (both banks, Fig. 2). From October
1995 to June 1996 all watercourses in the study
area were surveyed monthly from headwaters to
mouth. Otter signs (anal secretions, spraints and
tracks) were recorded for each 500m stretch by
walking the entire length (both banks) of all
watercourses,
wading
in
the
river
wherever
possible. Holts, food remains and scrapes were
accepted as proof of the presence of otters only
when supported by the occurrence of spraints
and/or footprints in the near vicinity. Signs of
mink were also noted. All otter signs were
recorded on a map of the area (Coillte six-inch to
the mile forest map), and the spraints were
described as recent, old and very old based on their
consistency and the degree of bleaching. A range
of environmental variables were also evaluated for
each 500m river stretch (Table 1). Since several
factors, such as heavy rain, may inﬂuence the
reliability of the results, all study reaches were
surveyed twice during each month of the study.
Tracks were measured and ascribed to otter
size classes based on a modiﬁcation of the schemes
of Jenkins (1980) and O’Sullivan (1992) (Table 2).
Measurements of tracks were taken across the foot
from the tip of the middle toe to the extremity of
the heel (length) and from the extremities of toes 1
to 5 (width). The median values of the track sizes,
both width and length, were calculated, and the
raw results were tested (Kruskal-Wallis) to analyse
for any signiﬁcant differences among the different
track size classes that would be indicative of
different animal size.
3


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
Fig. 2—Otter distribution in the Araglin Valley based on the 1995–96 survey of the current study.
Home range boundaries were identiﬁed by
the occurrence of intensively marked areas or
aggregation
of
spraints
(Erlinge
1967;
1968),
sometimes separated by extensive stretches of
watercourse with no faeces or a decreasing density
of faeces. Boundaries of home ranges may be
identiﬁed at the mid-point of these stretches
(Macdonald et al. 1978). Mounds of scraped sand,
mud or grass, usually with spraints on top, may also
be postulated as signs of range boundaries (Mason
and Macdonald 1986). The use of differential
sprainting rates to delineate home range boundaries
has been questioned (Kruuk 1995), but in the
present study a combination of all of these methods
was used. Range boundaries were subsequently
transcribed onto maps using the above data and the
topography of the study area.
The relationship between spraints and other
signs
was
examined
using
Spearman
rank
correlation. This method was also used to evaluate
the relationship between percentage of otter signs
and
the
above-mentioned
habitat
parameters.
Correlations between otter signs and land use
(moorland,
plantation
forest
and
agriculture/
pasture) were evaluated, and the proportion of
otter
spraints
recorded
in
each
month
was
calculated. In addition, multiple linear regression
was used to identify those measured variables that
most inﬂuenced sprainting activity.
DIET ANALYSIS
In order to determine the otter diet in the study
area, spraints were collected monthly within the
500m reaches by walking both banks of the three
major watercourses described above. Each spraint
found was stored in a specimen tube or an
envelope, labelled and returned to the laboratory.
Table 1—Scalable
environmental
para-
meters recorded during the survey
in the study area. The presence/
absence of holts is also recorded.
Scale
Parameters
Bank type
1=silt
2=earth
3=sand
4=gravel
5=stone
1=0.3m
River depth
2=0.3–0.5m
3=0.5–0.7m
4=0.7–1.0m
1=1.0m
River width
2=1.0–2.0m
3=2.0–3.0m
4=3.0–4.0m
5=4.0–5.0m
6= 5.0m
Flow regime
1=slow
2=fast
Lying up availability
1=none
2=low
3=medium
4=high
% vegetation cover
1% 2% 3% 5% 7% 10%
15% 20% 25% 30% 40%
of both banks
50% 65% 80% 90%
4


OTTER DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND HABITAT USE IN RELATION TO LAND USE
Spraints were air dried at room temperature and
weighed to the nearest 0.01g. Mucus was removed
by soaking each spraint in a solution of oxidising
agent ‘Steradent’ (Webb 1976). The spraint was
then washed through a sieve of 0.5mm mesh and
dried again. It was then gently broken up by hand
and examined under a binocular microscope. All
prey remains were assigned to one of twelve food
categories: salmonids, eel, stickleback, minnow,
frogs,
birds,
mammals,
crayﬁsh,
plant
matter,
freshwater mussels, other invertebrates (insects and
annelids) and unidentiﬁed prey. The remains of
ﬁshes
were
identiﬁed
from
their
vertebrae,
jawbones, teeth and other bones by comparison
with reference collections and the keys of Webb
(1976), Libois et al. (1987), Libois and Hallet-
Libois (1988) and Conroy et al. (1993). The
approximate fork lengths of ﬁsh eaten (total length
in the case of eel) were derived from the lengths of
vertebrae in the spraints using the regression
formulae of Wise (1980). Mammals and birds were
identiﬁed through their feathers or fur, teeth and
other bones using the keys of Day (1966) and
Yalden (1977). Insects and other invertebrates
were recorded as ‘invertebrate’ only. Hard remains
too
damaged
for
clear
identiﬁcation
were
categorised as unidentiﬁed.
Data are presented for each food category
using three methods:
 Percentage
frequency
of
occurrence
(F%—
number of spraints containing prey category i
(occurrences) divided by the total number of
spraints, multiplied by 100 (Jenkins et al. 1979));
 Relative
percentage
of
frequency
(Fr%—
number of occurrences of food category i
divided by the total number of occurrences of all
prey
categories,
multiplied
by
100
(Rowe-Rowe 1977));
 Percentage bulk (Sc%): based on a scoring system
of 1–10 to assess the importance of each prey
item in a spraint (1 being a trace item and 10 a
spraint entirely composed of one single prey
category). The score for each category was
multiplied by the spraint dry weight. The
resulting ﬁgures for each category from all
spraints were then summed and expressed as a
percentage value of all prey categories (Wise et
al. 1981).
The ﬁrst two methods tend to overestimate
the importance of prey taxa that have a large
proportion of indigestible parts, small ﬁshes that are
usually eaten completely and prey taken frequently
but in small quantities. On the other hand, large
ﬁsh and prey that occur occasionally but in large
amounts tend to be underestimated (Wise 1978;
Chanin 1981; Carss 1995). In addition, prey with
a large proportion of soft parts might be missed.
The third method has a possible error in the
subjective assessment of the score of the relative
volume of each item as a proportion of the spraint,
but it is perhaps a more accurate reﬂection of the
relative importance of different prey types in the
diet.
Dietary data were grouped into periods of
approximately two months in order to investigate
seasonal variation in prey. Because of the lower
number of samples collected in June, these were
included with those of April–May.
Spearman rank correlation (rs) was used to
investigate the relationships between the results of
the three analytical methods. The composition of
the otter diet was also compared for the three
rivers—the
Araglin,
the
Douglas
and
the
Glenﬁnish—using Spearman rank correlation. The
otter diet for the three home ranges identiﬁed (Fig.
1) was compared, considering only the spraints
collected
clearly
within
these
territories
and
excluding the overlap areas. The dietary differences
between spraints collected within three different
habitats were also considered.
Seasonal changes in the trophic niche breadth,
based on bimonthly dietary data, was derived from
the Levins’ index (B) (Feinsinger et al. 1981), using
Fr% and Sc%:
Table 2—Criteria used to distinguish size classes of otters by track sizes.
Jenkins (1980)
O’Sullivan (1992)
Ottino and Giller (this study)
Track length (cm)
Otter size (cm)
Track width (cm)
Otter size (cm)
Track size (cm)
Otter size (cm)
4.0
C
4.0
C
5.0
C/J
5.0
Y
—
4.0–5.3
C/Y
—
5.0–6.0
SAM/AF
5.5–6.5
—
—
SA
6.0
—
—
WGY/A
—
—
AF
—
—
6.0–7.0
AF
6.0
7.0
AM
6.5
AM
7.0
AM
C=cub; Y=young; WGY=well grown young; J=juvenile; SA=sub-adult; A=adult; SAM=sub-adult male;
AF=adult female; AM=adult male.
5


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
B=1/Rpi
2
where R is the number of food categories available
and pi is the relative percentage of frequency of
each food categories (in this case Fr and Sc). B
ranges from 1/R, when the species uses only one
food category, to 1, when all categories are used
equally.
RESULTS
DISTRIBUTION AND DENSITY
Some sites recorded as negative in the previous
surveys (see Introduction) were positive for the
otter presence in this study. In addition, of the 39
river units of watercourses surveyed for the ﬁrst
time, 23 (58.9%) were positive (Fig. 2).
A total of 462 signs were identiﬁed over the
whole study period, the most common being
spraints, followed by tracks, scrapes and lying-up
(Table 3). Using all data from the entire study area
and period, a signiﬁcant correlation was found
between number of spraints and other otter signs
(Table 4). Otter spraints were found in 56 (50%) of
Fig. 3—Frequency of otter signs (% of all signs on both
banks) per 500m length along a) Araglin river; b)
Douglas river (D) and its tributaries (K1, K2, K3, K4).
the one hundred and twelve 500m reaches of river
surveyed (full details are given in Ottino 1997). Of
the reaches with sprainting sites, 4 (7.14%) were
located on the Glenﬁnish River, 19 (33.93%) in
the Douglas (Kilworth) catchment, 28 (50%) on
the Araglin River and 5 (8.93%) on a further two
tributaries of the Araglin River. The majority of
spraints were deposited on large prominent rocks
near and/or in the rivers or under bridges. In the
study area, three home ranges can be delineated,
but their exact extent along the various tributary
streams
is
unknown
(Fig.
1).
Home
range
boundaries, with high levels of sprainting and
scraping recorded, were found on the Araglin
River and on the upper Kilworth catchment. The
number of signs tended to decrease away from the
home range boundaries, and the highest numbers
occurred around the holts: stretches 15 and 46 in
the Araglin River, stretch 1K1 in the Kilworth
catchment (Fig. 3a and 3b) and stretch 3G in the
Glenﬁnish River (Fig. 4a). The other peaks of
Table 3—Statistical data of the sprainting
activity and other otter signs across
the 112 sites in the study area.
SD
Mean
n
Min.−max.
6.58
4.12
Signs
0−32
462
Spraints
287
2.55
0−27
4.55
Tracks
3.04
125
0−15
1.12
0−7
0.20
24
Scrape
0.91
0.57
0−4
Lying-up
22
0.19
SD=standard deviation; n=number of occurrences of
each sign.
Table 4—Correlation between spraints and other signs of otter presence. Both Spearman rank
correlation coefﬁcient and the probability level are reported.
Tracks
Scrape
Lying-up
Spraints
0.35 (P0.001)
0.56 (P0.001)
0.88 (P0.001)
0.37 (P0.001)
Signs
—
0.21 (P=0.002)
0.17 (P=0.054)
0.21 (P=0.026)
Spraints
—
—
Tracks
0.05 (P=0.516)
0.48 (P0.001)
0.19 (P=0.037)
—
—
Scrape
—
n=112
6


OTTER DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND HABITAT USE IN RELATION TO LAND USE
Fig. 4—Frequency of otter signs (% of all signs on both
banks) per 500m length along a) Glenﬁnish stream (G);
b) Muchnagh stream (M) and a tributary of the Araglin
river (L).
than 0.3m deep, had temporarily dried up or was
low.
The
highest
number
of
otter
signs
was
recorded in spring and early summer, with a
minimum in March, probably due to the heavy
rain that occurred in that month. This trend was
mostly found in home range 2 (see below), while
in home range 1 the lowest number of otter signs
was recorded in winter, increasing in spring and
early summer (Fig. 5).
Four otter size classes could be identiﬁed using
either
width
or
length
of
tracks
(Table
5).
Cub/juvenile otter tracks were recorded on ten
occasions: ﬁve times in December, three times in
February and twice in May. The presence of one
family group, as indicated by cub/juvenile tracks
found in association with larger tracks (adult
female), occurred ﬁve times: three times near the
holt in home range 2 (Fig. 1) and twice near the
home range boundaries. An adult male utilised the
central home range (range 2, Fig. 1), which
included that of the family group. Intermediate
track sizes were found at the two home range
boundaries and around the two holts in the home
ranges 1 and 3, which suggested the presence of
solitary animals (presumed sub-adult male).
To estimate the number of otters in the study
area, we used a combination of the total number of
active holts identiﬁed, the track sizes measured, the
home ranges identiﬁed and the otters sighted.
Track size suggested a minimum of two cubs.
Thus we estimate a minimum of six otters in the
Araglin Valley. Assuming a male otter to have a
home range of 15–19km (Erlinge 1967; Leidler
1982), the predicted maximum carrying capacity of
the study area of 56km of river would be 3–4
male otters. If the two sub-adult otters are males,
the
Araglin
Valley
would
hold
around
the
expected otter density.
HABITAT USE
The median value of river depth throughout the
study period was 0.3–0.5m, and the vegetation
Fig. 5—Monthly changes in the number of otter spraints
in the three home ranges recorded in the study area.
signs coincided with particular zones in addition to
the boundaries of home ranges (stretches 1, 2, 4,
29, 30, 31, 5K2 and 3K3), such as bases of bridges,
large boulders and conﬂuences of two rivers. In
contrast, the lowest number of signs was found in
the Kilworth catchment (Fig. 3b) and on the
headwater reaches of each river (Figs 3 and 4), and
signs were absent where the river depth was less
Table 5—Median values of the track sizes measured in the study area.
Size classes
Number of tracks
Median
Min.–max.
Width
Adult female
6–6.5
6
7
Length
6–7
6.5
7
5
6.5–7
Width
6.5
Adult male
7
7–8
Length
5
10
3.75
3–5
Cub/juvenile
Width
3–5
Length
10
4.25
Sub-adult male
5–5
5
6
Width
5.5–6
5.5
6
Length
7


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
cover ranged from 2% (trees very rare) to 90%
(dense trees covering large areas). Full details of
habitat variables are available in Ottino (1997).
The
highest
percentage
cover
of
vegetation
occurred in the Kilworth catchment, in the middle
areas of the Araglin River and in the Glenﬁnish
River. In the headwater reaches of the Araglin
River,
moorland
was
predominant
and
the
percentage cover was very low in comparison to
the other stretches of this river.
Signiﬁcant and positive relationships were
found between number of otter signs and river
depth, river width, lying-up availability and the
presence of otter holts. No trends were recorded
for bank type, vegetation cover and ﬂow rate
(Table
6).
A
maginally
signiﬁcant
positive
relationship (P=0.052) was also found between
otter signs and mink. The results of multiple linear
regression analysis (Table 7) conﬁrmed that the
presence of holts was the most important variable
associated with otter presence, followed by river
depth. None of the other parameters could explain
a signiﬁcant amount of variation in otter signs.
There
was,
however,
a
negative
correlation
between
otter
spraints
and
percentage
of
vegetation cover in forest habitat (rs= −0.216,
P0.005)
while
positive
correlations
were
recorded in the agriculture and moorland areas
(rs=0.144, P0.005 and rs=0.100, P0.005
respectively).
Diet
The results of the overall spraint analysis, using the
three analytical methods, and pooling all data over
seasons and rivers for all food categories are
presented in Table 8. All these diet data sets were
highly
correlated
(rs=0.95–1.00).
Therefore
seasonal changes have been expressed as percentage
of frequency (Fr%) and percentage bulk (Sc%) only
to illustrate the relative importance of various prey
categories (Fig. 6). Fish formed 55.92% of prey
items and 70.03% of the percentage bulk overall.
Salmonids were the most important, followed by
eels. Minnow appeared in the spraints from April
to
June,
and
stickleback
occurred
in
winter
(December–January)
and
spring
(April–May)
samples, if only in small quantities.
Frogs formed the second most important
dietary component, representing 17.1% frequency
of prey items and 20.9% percentage bulk overall.
They were present in the diet mainly during their
breeding season (February–March; Fairley 1984;
Weber 1990). Crayﬁsh were absent from the diet
in winter, while consumption of mammals tended
to peak at this time. Bird remains occurred as
feathers
and
could
be
generally
ascribed
to
Rallidae, but on one occasion a beak was found
Table 6—Correlation
between
signs
and
environmental parameters. Both
Spearman
rank
correlation
co-
efﬁcient and the probability level
are reported.
P
Signs
0.996
−0.046
Bank type
% vegetation cover
0.022
0.817
River depth
0.461
0.001
River width
0.326
0.001
0.786
−0.026
Speed of water
0.190
0.044
Lying-up availability
0.052
0.184
Mink
Holt
0.001
0.322
Table 7—Multiple linear regression analysis for identifying the variables that inﬂuence
sprainting activity.
P
Variable
Coefﬁcient
t
0.255
−0.383
Bank type
−1.144
0.955
0.057
0.155
Vegetation cover
4.869
3.777
0.001
River depth
0.213
0.486
1.254
River width
Speed of water
−1.572
−1.413
0.161
Lying-up availability
0.031
0.043
0.966
−1.681
Mink
0.381
−0.881
Holt
20.58
8.900
0.001
R=0.762; R2=0.581; AdjR2=0.548; S.E.=4.419.
n=112; t=test statistic (Student’s t).
8


OTTER DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND HABITAT USE IN RELATION TO LAND USE
Fig. 6—Bimonthly distribution of Fr% (percentage bulk—shaded columns) and Sc% (percentage frequency—
unshaded columns) of the prey items in the otter diet throughout the study period.
9


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
10
Table 8—Composition of overall otter diet pooled across the rivers and habitats expressed as percentage frequency of occurrence (F%), relative
percentage frequency (Fr%) and percentage bulk (Sc%). Total number of spraints=287.
Seasonal changes in Sc%
Seasonal changes in Fr%
Seasonal changes in F%
Overall diet
F–M
A–J
O–N
D–J
Prey items
F–M
A–J
O–M
D–J
F–M
A–J
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
O–N
D–J
84.2
80.1
47.0
52.9
38.4
33.5
82.5
79
100
52.2
90
45.9
54.8
37.9
84.6
243
Salmonids
14.0
59.5
5.88
5.88
Eel
6.4
24.9
3.43
2.5
2.01
27.1
94
32.7
14.6
12.8
12.5
10
0
14.0
0
2.94
0
5.88
0
5
0
0
1.95
3.80
2.8
5
Stickleback
18
6.27
0
3.30
0
0
0
1.38
0
0
0
Minnow
0.74
4
1.39
0.62
0.48
0
0
62.2
30.5
1.47
2.94
28.4
12.8
0.62
0.5
3.12
38.4
5
13.1
20.9
17.1
38.3
110
Frogs
3.12
5
0
4.95
1.47
2.94
0
2.07
0.31
5
0
1.81
8
2.78
1.24
1.14
Birds
0.87
2.47
0
2.94
0.4
1.03
0
0
0
0.61
5
1.40
0.83
0.78
1.74
5
Mammals
43.8
32.2
26.4
20.5
20
13.4
8.12
4
4.38
Invertebrates
4.21
114
39.7
17.7
4.70
56.2
35
9.64
9.91
14.7
5.88
4.4
4.15
3.43
1
31.2
0.96
10
1.57
1.49
5.46
12.1
35
Plant matter
1.75
0.82
2.94
Unidentiﬁed
0
0.8
0.34
1.56
0
0.96
0.08
5
1.4
0.78
0.59
6.25
0
0.87
0.82
0
2.94
0.4
0.34
0
0.5
0
0.08
0.10
0.08
0.46
5
Freshwater mussels
3
1.04
1.75
0
0
Crayﬁsh
0
0.8
0
0
0
0.26
0
2
0.69
0.31
0.10
0
0
Fish: Salmonids (Salmo trutta, Salmo salar); Eel (Anguilla anguilla); Stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus); Minnow (Phoxinus phoxinus)
Amphibia: Frog (Rana temporaria)
Birds: Rallidae; Blackbird (Turdus merula)
Mammals: Brown rat (Rattus norvegicus); Wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus); Bank vole (Clethrionomys glareolus)
Crayﬁsh (Austropotamobius pallipes)
Freshwater mussels (Margaritifera margaritifera)
Other invertebrates: Coleoptera (Dytiscidae); Odonata; Ephemeroptera; Plecoptera; Trichoptera; Freshwater shrimp (Gammarus duebeni ); Earthworms (Lumbricidae)


OTTER DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND HABITAT USE IN RELATION TO LAND USE
11
Table 9—Variation in otter diet among spraints collected from various habitats expressed as percentage frequency of occurrence (F%), relative
percentage of frequency (Fr%) and percentage bulk (Sc%).
Araglin
Douglas
Glenﬁnish
Forest
Moorland
Agricultural land
Prey items
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
n
F% Fr%
Sc%
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
n F%
Fr%
Sc%
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
Salmonids
125 81.2
37.9
51.5
91 91
38.5
60.3
27 81.8
36
53.5
149 86.1
38.1
22.6
8 72.6
30.8
44.4
86 83.5
38.2
52.6
Eel
59 38.3
17.9
19.5
23 23
9.74
5.40 12 36.4
16
4.23
54 31.2
13.8
9.48 3 27.3
11.5
15.4
37 35.8
16.4
18.1
Stickleback
16 10.4
4.85
3.30
2
2
0.85
0.50
0
0
0
0
9
5.20
2.3
1.62 0
0
0
0
9
8.74
4
2.72
Minnow
2
1.29
0.61
0.26
2
2
0.85
1.00
0
0
0
0
3
1.72
0.76
0.63 0
0
0
0
1
0.96
0.44
0.28
Frogs
49 31.8
14.8
16.7
37 37
15.7
22.3
24 72.7
32
35.7
72 41.5
18.5
23.2
6 54.4
23.1
18.2
32 31.1
14.2
17.1
Birds
6
3.89
1.82
1.43
2
2
0.85
1.10
0
0
0
0
2
1.16
0.51
0.63 3 27.3
11.5
12.6
3
2.91
1.33
0.76
Mammals
2
1.29
0.61
0.83
1
1
0.42
0
2
6.06
2.66
3.32
4
2.31
1.02
0.97 0
0
0
0
1
0.96
0.44
0.68
Invertebrates
46 29.8
13.9
3.64 60 60
25.4
7.10
8 24.2
10.6
2.41
79 45.7
20.2
5.25 4 36.4
15.4
4.54 31 30.1
13.8
3.77
Plant matter
17 11.0
5.15
1.56 16 16
6.78
1.70
2
6.06
2.66
0.61
14
8.08
3.58
0.81 2 18.2
7.68
4.54 19 18.3
8.44
2.32
Unidentiﬁed
3
1.95
0.91
0.78
2
2
0.85
0.50
0
0
0
0
3
1.72
0.76
0.35 0
0
0
0
2
1.93
0.88
1.07
Freshwater
0.09
3
1.95
0.91
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1.16
0.51
0.12 0
0
0
0
1
0.96
0.44
mussels
Crayﬁsh
2
1.29
0.61
0.18
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1.93
0.88
0.28
n=number of occurrences.


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
Table 10—Composition of the otter diet in the three home range delineated expressed as percentage frequency of
occurrence (F%), relative percentage of frequency (Fr%) and percentage bulk (Sc%).
Home range 1
Home range 2
Home range 3
Prey items
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
n
F%
Fr%
Sc%
85.6
83
58.5
37.9
88.5
100
44.4
30.8
Salmonids
72.6
8
56.3
38.1
10.5
24.8
28
Eel
39
5.57
40.1
17.9
13.7
3
27.3
11.4
15.4
Stickleback
3
2.63
1.14
1.33
9
9.29
4.15
2.05
0
0
0
0
Minnow
2
1.77
0.76
0.87
1
1.02
0.45
0.10
0
0
0
0
Frogs
43
38.1
0.38
23.3
41
42.3
18.9
20.3
6
54.4
23.1
18.2
12.6
11.4
27.3
3
0.31
0.45
1.02
1
0.96
0.76
1.77
2
Birds
0
0
0
1.74
1.37
3.09
0
3
0.62
0.76
1.77
2
Mammals
Invertebrates
64
56.5
24.1
6.64
28
28.9
12.8
3.70
4
36.4
15.4
4.54
4.54
7.68
18.2
2
0.81
2.75
6.18
6
1.67
9.09
15.8
18
Plant matter
Unidentiﬁed
2
1.77
0.76
0
0.43
2
2.05
0.91
0.21
0
0
0
Freshwater mussels
0
0
0
0
0
3
3.08
1.37
0.31
0
0
0
0
0.21
0.45
1.02
1
Crayﬁsh
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
n=number of occurrences.
with
other
remains
that
were
identiﬁable
as
blackbird (Turdus merula).
Nearly 40% of spraints contained invertebrate
remains represented by lumbricid worms, Dytiscus
beetles (Coleoptera), dragonﬂy (Odonata), fresh-
water shrimp (Gammarus) and other aquatic insects.
The larger of the above insects are rarely taken by
trout, and worms could be considered as a food
taken directly by the otter. However some of these
and many other smaller insects are typical prey of
ﬁshes and thus are likely to be secondary food. Plant
matter formed 1.49% of the bulk diet and was most
likely consumed incidentally by otters when feeding
on other prey. On three occasions freshwater
mussels occurred as broken shells associated with
other food remains.
The
relative
importance
of
the
dietary
components varied among the three rivers (Table 9).
For example, ﬁsh formed 61.26% of the relative
percentage
of
frequency
and
74.56%
of
the
percentage bulk on the Araglin River, 49.94% and
57.2% respectively on the River Douglas and 52%
and 57.73% respectively on the Glenﬁnish River.
Frogs were less important prey on the Araglin River
than on the other two rivers considered (Table 9),
and freshwater mussels and crayﬁsh were absent on
the Douglas and Glenﬁnish rivers. These differences
in relative abundance of prey items were signiﬁcant
between
the
Araglin
and
Glenﬁnish
rivers
(P=0.018) and between Glenﬁnish and Douglas
rivers (P=0.034), but there was no signiﬁcant
difference between the Araglin and Douglas rivers
(P=0.209).
The relative importance of each prey group also
differed considerably among three different habitats
(Table 9). Fish was a more important food in the
spraints collected from agricultural land than from
the forest habitat, representing 73.7% and 44.33% of
percentage bulk respectively, even though this prey
was the principal prey in all habitats. In contrast,
frogs were more abundant in spraints collected from
the forest in comparison to other habitats and birds
formed a signiﬁcant prey category only in the
moorland area. The otters’ diet differs signiﬁcantly
between the forest and moorland habitats and
between
agricultural
and
moorland
habitats
(P=0.015 and P=0.025 respectively).
These differences in otter diet among the rivers
and habitats extrapolated to differences among the
three delineated home ranges (Table 10). The diet
of the otters did not differ signiﬁcantly between
home range 1 and home range 2 (P=0.885), but
there was a signiﬁcant difference between these two
home ranges and home range 3 (P=0.025 and
P=0.015).
Table 11—Bimonthly
variation
of
niche
breadth (B) expressed as relative
percentage frequency (Fr%) and
percentage bulk (Sc%).
Fr%
Sc%
0.12
0.26
October–November
0.24
December–January
0.13
0.19
0.30
February–March
0.38
0.27
April–May
0.36
0.23
Pooled
12


OTTER DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND HABITAT USE IN RELATION TO LAND USE
The trophic niche breadth of the otter tended
to increase from October–November to spring/
early
summer
(Table
11).
The
diet
breadth,
measured on the basis of percentage bulk, was
smaller than that measured on occurrences.
DISCUSSION
Previous surveys on the otter presence have usually
been based on sites chosen at random and/or
because of accessibility to the river. The type of
ﬁeld survey carried out in the present study over
the entire watercourses is a particularly suitable
approach to obtaining more detailed information
on otter presence in a relatively small area. Using
the previous surveys in this study area (Chapman
and Chapman 1982; O’Sullivan 1991) and the
more detailed and extensive results of the present
study it is possible to conclude that the otters are
widespread within the study area. Otter presence
and a holt were also recorded on the headwater
reaches of the system. The fact that the presence of
otters was found at sites recorded as negative in the
previous surveys suggests either an increase in the
otter population in the Araglin Valley or an
expansion of the area used by existing otters.
The home range boundaries were identiﬁed as
meeting zones of otters coming from four different
holts, and throughout the study period these
boundaries remained relatively static. The highest
number of spraints, the commonest of the otter
signs, occurred in winter and spring, and the
pattern was particularly evident in the central
home range (home range 2). This could be related
to the emergence of cubs (Green et al. 1984;
Mason
and
Macdonald
1986)
or
to
the
reinforcement of dominance relationships within
the otter population when young animals become
independent and establish their own home ranges.
On the basis of the very small size of tracks found
near the holt in home range 2 and the fact that the
cubs leave the den about 70 days after birth, it is
possible to suggest that a minimum of two cubs
were born in early winter in the central home
range. Other larger cub tracks recorded in the
following months near the home range boundaries
(sometimes associated with very small spraints)
would suggest that these cubs had grown up and
had started to patrol the home range with their
mother.
There was little relationship between the
frequency of otter signs and vegetation cover in
the
Kilworth
catchment
in
contrast
to
the
Glenﬁnish River, where the distribution of signs
and cover were positively correlated. This may be
due to the different type of vegetation that occurs
in the two areas: coniferous forest was widespread
in the Kilworth forest, whereas deciduous species
were prevalent along the Glenﬁnish River. The
lowest number of otter signs and spraints was
recorded
in
the
Kilworth
catchment
where
watercourses ﬂow through conifer plantations.
Other studies on the interaction between forestry
and
freshwater
ecosystems
have
identiﬁed
an
alteration
in
water
chemistry,
turbidity,
ﬂow
regime
and
temperature
arising
from
forest
practices under certain sets of circumstances that
may affect the ﬂora and fauna of the rivers (Mason
and
Macdonald
1987;
O’Halloran
and
Giller
1993). In this particular context, acidiﬁcation of
streams
in
conifer
afforested
catchments
can
negatively affect ﬁsh density and consequently
could
affect
otter
populations.
However,
in
Kilworth
ﬁsh
populations
are
relatively
high
(Clenaghan 1996; Elso and Giller 2001), and there
is no evidence of acidiﬁcation in the catchment
(Cleneghan et al. 1998). The low number of otter
signs and spraints could relate to the relatively small
size of the streams in Kilworth or to the fact that
relatively few large ﬁsh (age 3 years) have been
recorded in most of the Kilworth catchment
(Clenaghan 1996).
In contrast, in the Glenﬁnish River, dominant
tree species included Fraxinus excelsior, Salix spp,
Acer pseudoplatanus and Rubus spp, and there was a
positive
correlation
between
otter
signs
and
percentage of vegetation cover. Similar conclusions
were reached in other studies (Macdonald and
Mason 1983; Green et al. 1984; Macdonald and
Mason 1985), where marking activities of otters
were mostly associated with mature ash and
sycamore.
Another factor that limits the otters in the
study area is river depth. No otter signs were
found
in
the
headwater
stretches
of
small
tributaries, where the water levels are low. In
addition, otter signs were positively associated with
pools, as found by other authors (Macdonald and
Mason 1982b; Kruuk et al. 1986; Kemenes and
Demeter 1995). These results and those of other
studies
(Macdonald
et
al.
1978;
Jenkins
and
Burrows
1980;
Macdonald
and
Mason
1983;
Adrian et al. 1985) suggest that a suitable habitat
for the otter must include, among other factors
(such
as
a
low
level
of
pollution,
limited
disturbance and good food availability), dense
bankside cover, principally composed of deciduous
species such as ash and sycamore, and good pools
with relatively low water velocity. A more detailed
review of habitat use and conservation of otters has
been recently published by Kruuk et al. (1998).
As mentioned in the introduction, the otter
has been described as a ﬁsh specialist and in the
Araglin Valley the diet of otter was principally
based on ﬁsh. The otter generally captures ﬁsh in
proportion to their abundance, but proportions of
different ﬁshes caught are also assumed to depend
13


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
on the mobility of individual species. Slower
swimming species seem to be the favoured food
(Erlinge 1968), and eels are slower prey than
salmonids and have been identiﬁed as the major
prey on the Somerset levels, in southern England
(Webb 1975) and in Deeside, north-east Scotland
(Jenkins et al. 1979; Jenkins and Harper 1980). On
the other hand, in habitats where eels are less
common, Cyprinidae form the most important
component of the otter diet (e.g. Erlinge 1967;
Prigioni et al. 1991). However, the results of the
present
study
suggest
that
the
otter
is
also
somewhat of an opportunist. Otter diet tends to
change with variation in the relative abundance of
the different prey types. There are, for example,
seasonal ﬂuctuations in crayﬁsh and amphibian
predation. Crayﬁsh tends to be a minor food in
winter when the water is cold and the animals are
in their refuges (Erlinge 1967, 1969; McFadden
and Fairley 1984; Breathnach and Fairley 1993).
Delibes and Adrian (1987) showed that the feeding
ecology of the otter changed after the introduction
of Procambarus clarki in Spain. This exotic crayﬁsh
replaced ﬁsh as the major component of otter diet.
High predation by otters on frogs has been noted
during the frog breeding season (as seen in this
study) (Jenkins and Harper 1980; Fairley 1984;
Kyne et al. 1989; Weber 1990) and also in
association with the hibernation period or in late
autumn
(Erlinge
1967;
Jenkins
et
al.
1979).
Seasonal changes in ﬁsh prey can be related to
changes in ﬁsh activity. Wise (1978) showed that
salmonids tended to be abundant in the diet in
winter, whereas eels were taken principally in
summer, when they are more active and more
abundant. Gormally and Fairley (1982) have also
attributed the decrease of eels in winter to the
autumn migration of mature specimens. Other
studies have similarly recorded a lower number of
eels in winter (Jenkins et al. 1979; McFadden and
Fairley 1984; Mason and Macdonald 1986). The
higher numbers of salmonids in the diet in winter
is thought to be due to low water temperatures
that reduce the swimming ability of salmonids
(Heggenes et al. 1993), which then become more
vulnerable to predation (Carss 1995).
Although the otter is mainly piscivorous, it is
known to feed on a variety of other prey types.
The occurrence of freshwater mussels as part of
otter diet was found by Norris (1974) in County
Clare and O’Sullivan (1994) in the Blackwater
catchment, and their importance can possibly be
underestimated as they have more soft parts in
comparison to other prey types. However, the low
occurrence of freshwater mussels in the present
study is probably due to their rareness in the study
area. Waterfowl and rails ﬁgure quite regularly in
the otter diet (Hewson 1973) but are usually
regarded as being of secondary importance. These
animals, together with crayﬁsh and frogs, are more
seasonal, being more often caught in summer
when ﬁsh availability is reduced (Wise et al. 1981).
Mammals are usually minor dietary components as
found here. Invertebrates are generally ingested
with other prey, even if aquatic insects (e.g.
Dytiscus beetles) seem to be taken intentionally by
otters (Erlinge and Jensen 1981; Kyne et al. 1989;
Breathnach and Fairley 1993). The identiﬁcation
of earthworms in the food of otter is interesting
and,
although
rarely
mentioned,
it
has
been
described in some studies (Southern 1964; Fairley
1972; Chanin 1981). In addition, otters have
occasionally been recorded as feeding on carrion
(Stephens
1957;
Green
and
Green
1980;
O’Sullivan et al. 1994).
Any comparison of diet among rivers and
habitats is based on the assumption that spraints
reﬂect food consumed in the general area where
the spraints were deposited. On this basis, the
variation in otter diet among the three different
rivers probably reﬂects ﬁsh availability. Larger eels
are found in habitats of slow and deep water, with
stable water levels, and such habitat is more
common in the Araglin River than in the other
watercourses. Frogs and mammals were more
important prey resources in the Glenﬁnish River,
but in this stream stickleback and minnow were
absent from spraints. The richest overall food
resource (based on dietary data) was recorded in
home range 2, where tracks of an adult male
(probably a dominant otter) and a family group
were found. This suggests that the sub-adult otters
located in the other home ranges (Ottino 1997)
may have been excluded from the central home
range by social pressure and thus occupied more
marginal territories with poorer prey availability. In
home range 3, for example, where the ﬁsh prey are
known to be less abundant (Giller et al. 1997),
frogs and birds increased in importance in otter
diet.
Freshwater
systems
are
very
sensitive
to
land-use changes, and the otter seems to reﬂect
that in its diet. In the afforested sites the relative
contribution of ﬁsh appeared to be lower than in
agricultural sites and frogs were more abundant in
comparison to more herbaceous habitats. The most
afforested
sites
occurred
in
the
Kilworth
catchment, on the River Douglas. The lowest
number of prey items in spraints were found in
moorland sites, probably because the habitat was
poorer (in relation to low levels of vegetation
cover and water ﬂow) in comparison to the other
two habitats.
The Araglin Valley can thus be considered a
good
habitat
for
otters,
particularly
in
the
Glenﬁnish River and the middle course of the
Araglin River. Other areas of the valley may only
offer secondary habitats, although they are utilised
14


OTTER DISTRIBUTION, DENSITY, DIET AND HABITAT USE IN RELATION TO LAND USE
to some degree. The value of the valley as otter
habitat relates to the availability of key habitat
features and a broad prey base. While extensive
surveys
provide
some
useful
information
on
large-scale national and regional distribution, the
detailed approach adopted here is clearly necessary
to begin to understand the precise relationships
between otter distribution and ecology and habitat
factors—information
that
is
essential
for
conservation measures and the implementation of
management practices to encourage and maintain
otter populations along Irish river systems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank Professor C. Prigioni for advice
and colleagues in the Freshwater Laboratory at
UCC for assistance during the project. We are also
grateful to two anonymous referees for help in
improving the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Adrian, M.I., Wilden, W. and Delibes, M.
1985
Otter distribution and agriculture in south-western
Spain. 17th Congress of the International Union of
Game Biologists, Brussels.
Bas, N., Jenkins, D. and Rothery, P.
1984
Ecology
of otters in northern Scotland. V. The distribution
of otter Lutra lutra faeces in relation to bankside
vegetation on the River Dee in summer 1981.
Journal of Applied Ecolology 21, 507–13.
Breathnach, S. and Fairley, J.S.
1993
The diet of
otters Lutra lutra (L.) in the Clare river system.
Biology and Environment 93B, 151–8.
Carss, D.N.
1995
Foraging behaviour and feeding
ecology of the otter Lutra lutra: a selective review.
Hystrix 7, 179–94.
Carss, D.N., Nelson, K.C., Bacon, P.J. and Kruuk,
H.
1998
Otter (Lutra lutra L.) prey selection in
relation to ﬁsh abundance and community structure
in
two
different
freshwater
habitats.
In
N.
Dunstone and M. Gorman (eds), Behaviour and
ecology of riparian mammals, 191–214. Symposium of
the Zoological Society of London, 71. Cambridge
University Press.
Chanin, P.
1981
The diet of the otter and its
relations with the feral mink in two areas of
south-west England. Acta Theriologica 26, 83–95.
Chapman,
P.J.
and
Chapman,
L.L.
1982
Otter
survey
of
Ireland,
1980–81.
London.
Vincent
Wildlife Trust.
Clenaghan,
C.
1996
The
spatial
and
temporal
variation
in
the
freshwater
ecology
and
hydrochemistry
of
an
Irish
conifer
afforested
catchment. Unpublished PhD thesis, University
College Cork.
Cleneghan, C., O’Halloran, J., Giller, P. S. and Roche,
N.
1998
Longitudinal and temporal variation
in the hydrochemistry of streams in an Irish conifer
afforested catchment Hydrobiologia 389, 63–71.
Conroy, J.W.H. and French, D.D.
1987
The use
of spraints to monitor population of otters (Lutra
lutra). Symposium of the Zoological Society of London
58, 247–62. Cambridge University Press.
Conroy, J.W.H. and French, D.D.
1991
Seasonal
patterns in the sprainting behaviour of otters (Lutra
lutra L.) in Shetland. In C. Reuther and R.
Rochert (eds), Proceedings of the Vth International
Otter Colloquium. Habitat 6, 159–66.
Conroy, J.W.H., Watt, J., Webb. J.B. and Jones,
A.
1993
A guide to the identiﬁcation of prey
remains in otter spraint. An occasional publication of the
Mammal Society 16, 52 pp.
Day, M.G.
1966
Identiﬁcation of hair and feather
remains in the gut and faeces of stoats and weasels.
Journal of Zoology, London 148, 201–17.
Delibes, M. and Adrian, I.
1987
Effects of crayﬁsh
introduction on otter Lutra lutra food in the
Do˜nana
National
Park,
S.W.
Spain.
Biological
Conserveration 42, 153–9.
Delibes,
M.,
Macdonald,
S.M.
and
Mason,
C.F.
1991
Seasonal
marking,
habitat
and
organo-
chlorine contamination in otters (Lutra lutra); a
comparison between catchments in Andalucia and
Wales. Mammalia 55, 567–78.
Elso, J. and Giller, P.S.
2001
Physical characteristics
inﬂuencing the utilisation of pools by brown trout
in an afforested catchment in southern Ireland.
Journal of Fish Biology 58, 201–21.
Erlinge, S.
1967
Home range of otter Lutra lutra L.
in southern Sweden. Oikos 18, 186–209.
Erlinge, S.
1968
Territoriality of the otter Lutra
lutra. Oikos 19, 81–98.
Erlinge, S.
1969
Food habits of the otter Lutra lutra
and the mink Mustela vison in a trout water in
southern Sweden. Oikos 20, 1–7.
Erlinge,
S.
1972
The
situation
of
the
otter
population in Sweden. Viltrevy 8, 379–97.
Erlinge, S. and Jensen, B.
1981
The diet of otters
Lutra lutra L. in Denmark. Natura Jutland 19,
161–5.
Fairley, J.S.
1972
Food of otters (Lutra lutra) from
Co. Galway, Ireland and notes on other aspects of
their biology. Journal of Zoology, London 166,
469–74.
Fairley, J.S.
1984
Otters feeding on breeding frogs.
Irish Naturalist Journal 21, 372.
Feinsinger,
P.,
Spers,
E.E.
and
Poole,
R.W.
1981
A simple measure of niche breadth. Ecology
62, 27–32.
Giller, P.S., O’Halloran, J., Hernan, R., Roche, N.,
Clenaghan, C., Evans, J., Kiely, G.K., Morris, P.,
Allot, N., Brennan, M., Reynolds, J., Cooke, D.,
Kelly-Quinn, M., Bracken, J., Coyle, S. and Farrel,
E.P.
1993
An
integrated
study
of
forested
catchments in Ireland. Journal of the Society of Irish
Foresters 50, 70–88.
Giller,
P.,
O’Halloran,
J.,
Kiely,
G.,
Evans,
J.,
Clenaghan,
C.,
Hernan,
R.,
Roche,
N.
and
Morris, P.
1997
A study of the effects of
stream hydrology and water quality in forested
catchments on ﬁsh and invertebrates. AQUAFOR
Report 2. Dublin. COFORD.
15


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
Gormally, M.J. and Fairley, J.S.
1982
Food of
otters Lutra lutra in a freshwater lough and an
adjacent brackish lough in the west of Ireland.
Journal of Zoology, London 197, 313–21.
Green, J. and Green, R.
1980
Otter survey of
Scotland,
1977–79.
London.
Vincent
Wildlife
Trust.
Green, J., Green, R. and Jefferies, D.J.
1984
A
radio-tracking survey of otter Lutra lutra on a
Perthshire river system. Lutra 27, 85–145.
Heggenes, J., Krog, O.M.W., Lindas, O.R., Dokk,
J.G.
and
Bremnes,
T.
1993
Homeostatic
behavioural responses in a changing environment:
brown trout (Salmo trutta) become nocturnal during
winter. Journal of Animal Ecology 62, 295–308.
Hewson, R.
1973
Food and feeding habits of otters
Lutra lutra at Loch Park, north-east Scotland. Journal
of Zoology, London 170, 159–62.
Jenkins, D.
1980
Ecology of otters in northern
Scotland.
I.
Otter
(Lutra
lutra)
breeding
and
dispersion
in
mid-Deeside,
Aberdeenshire,
in
1974–79. Journal of Animal Ecology 49, 713–35.
Jenkins, D. and Burrows, G.O.
1980
Ecology of
otters in northern Scotland. III. The use of faeces as
indicators
of
otter
(Lutra
lutra)
density
and
distribution. Journal of Animal Ecology 49, 755–74.
Jenkins, D. and Harper, R.
1980
Ecology of otters
in northern Scotland. II. Analysis of otter (L. lutra)
and mink (M. vison) faeces from Deeside, N.E.
Scotland, in 1977–88. Journal of Animal Ecology 49,
737–45.
Jenkins,
D.,
Walker,
J.G.K.
and
McGowan,
D.
1979
Analysis of the otter (Lutra lutra) faeces
from Deeside, N.E. Scotland. Journal of Zoology,
London 187, 235–44.
Kemenes, I. and Demeter, A.
1995
A predictive
model of the effect of environmental factors on the
occurrence of otters (Lutra lutra L.) in Hungary.
Hystrix 7, 209–18.
Kruuk,
H.
1995
Wild
otters:
predation
and
populations. Oxford University Press.
Kruuk, H. and Moorhouse, A.
1990
Seasonal and
spatial differences in food selection by otters (Lutra
lutra) in Shetland. Journal of Zoology, London 221,
621–37.
Kruuk, H., Conroy, J.W.H., Glimmerveen, U. and
Ouwerkerk, E.J.
1986
The use of spraints to
survey populations of otters (Lutra lutra). Biological
Conservation 35, 187–94.
Kruuk, H., Carss, D.N., Conroy, J.M. and Gaywood,
M.J.
1998
Habitat use and conservation of
otters (Lutra lutra) in Britain: a review. In N.
Dunstone and M. Gorman (eds), Behaviour and
ecology of riparian mammals, 119–34. Symposium of
the Zoological Society of London, 71. Cambridge
University Press.
Kyne, M. J., Small, C. M. and Fairley, J. S.
1989
The food of the otter Lutra lutra in the Irish
midlands and a comparison with that of mink
Mustela vison in the same region. Proceedings of the
Royal Irish Academy 89B, 33-46
Kyne, M.J., Kyne, M.J. and Fairley, J.S.
1990
A
summer survey of otter sign on Roundstone Bog,
south
Connemara.
Irish
Naturalist
Journal
23,
273–76.
Leidler, L.
1982
Otters in Britain. Newton Abbot.
David and Charles.
Libois, R.M. and Hallet-Libois, C.
1988
E´le´ments
pour l’identiﬁcation des restes craˆniens des poissons
dolc¸aquicoles de Belgique et du nord de la France.
2-Cypriniformes. In J. Desse and N. Desse-Berset
(eds), Fiches d’oste´ologie animale pour l’arche´ologie, Se´rie
A (4): Poissons. Juan-les-pins. APDCA.
Libois,
R.M.,
Hallet-Libois,
C.
and
Rosoux,
R.
1987
E´le´ments pour l’identiﬁcation des restes
craˆniens des poissons dolc¸aquicoles de Belgique et
du
nord
de
la
France.
1-Anguilliformes,
Gaste´roste´iformes, Cyprinodontiformes et Perci-
formes. In J. Desse and N. Desse-Berset (eds), Fiches
d’oste´ologie animale pour l’arche´ologie, Se´rie A (3):
Poissons. Juan-les-pins. APDCA.
Lunnon, R.M. and Reynolds, J.D.
1991 Dis- tribution
of the otter (Lutra lutra) in Ireland and its value as
a indicator of habitat quality. In D.W. Jeffrey and B.
Madden
(eds),
Bioindicators
and
environmental
management, 435–43. London. Academic Press.
Macdonald, S.M. and Mason, C.F.
1982a
Otters in
Greece. Oryx 16, 240–44.
Macdonald, S.M. and Mason, C.F.
1982b
The otter
in central Portugal. Biological conservation 22, 207–15.
Macdonald, S.M. and Mason, C.F.
1983
Some
factors inﬂuencing the distribution of otters (Lutra
lutra). Mammal Review 13, 1–10.
Macdonald, S.M. and Mason, C.F.
1985
Otters,
their habitat and conservation in north-east Greece.
Biological Conservation 31, 191–210.
Macdonald,
S.M.
and
Mason,
C.F.
1988
Observations on an otter population in decline. Acta
Theriologica 33, 415–34.
Macdonald,
S.M.,
Mason,
C.F.
and
Coghill,
I.S.
1978
The otter and its conservation in the River
Teme catchment. Journal of Applied Ecology 15,
373–84.
Mason, C.F. and Macdonald, S.M.
1986
Otters:
ecology and conservation. Cambridge University Press.
Mason, C.F. and Macdonald, S.M.
1987
The use of
spraints for surveying otter Lutra lutra populations: an
evaluation. Biological Conservation 41, 167–77.
McFadden, Y.M.T. and Fairley, J.S.
1984
Food of
otters Lutra lutra (L.) in an Irish limestone river
system
with
special
reference
to
the
crayﬁsh
Austropotamobius pallipes (Lereboullet). Journal of the
Life Sciences, Royal Dublin Society 5, 65–76.
Norris, D.
1974
A study of the otter (L. lutra) on the
R.
Fergus
from
July
to
September
1974.
Unpublished Wildlife Service Report.
O’Halloran, J. and Giller, P.S.
1993
Forestry and
the ecology of streams and rivers: lessons from
abroad. Irish Forestry 50, 35–52.
O’Sullivan, W.M.
1991
The distribution of otters
Lutra lutra within a major Irish river system, the
Munster
Blackwater
catchment.
Irish
Naturalist
Journal 23, 1988–90.
O’Sullivan, W.M.
1992
An estimate of otter density
on part of the Blackwater catchment in summer.
Unpublished PhD thesis, University College Cork.
O’Sullivan, W.M.
1994
Summer diet of otters on
part of the River Blackwater catchment. Irish
Naturalist Journal 24, 349–53.
O’Sullivan,
W.M.,
Sleeman,
D.P.
and
Murphy,
D.M.
1994
Otters (Lutra lutra) feeding on
carrion. Irish Naturalist Journal 24, 140–43.
16


BIOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
Ottino, P.
1995
La lontra. Ricerche in Abruzzo.
L’Aquila. Quaderno del Bollettino C.A.I.
Ottino, P.
1997
Studies on otters in the Araglin
Valley, southern Ireland. Unpublished MSc thesis,
University College Cork.
Prauser,
N.
1985
Vorkommen
von
Fischottern
(Lutra lutra L. 1758) und ihre Abhangigkeit von der
Struktur
verschiedener
Habitat-Zonen
der
Wumme-Niederung.
Zeitschrift
fur
Angewandte
Zoologie 72, 83–91.
Prigioni, C., Pandolﬁ, M., Grimod, I., Fumagalli, R.,
Santolini,
R.,
Arca`,
G.,
Montemurro,
F.,
Bonacoscia, M. and Racana, A.
1991
The
otter in ﬁve Italian rivers. First report. In C.
Reuther and R. Rochert (eds), Proceedings of the
Vth
International
Otter
Colloquium,
143–5.
Habitat 6.
Rowe-Rowe, D.T.
1977
Food ecology of otters in
Natal, South Africa. Oikos 28, 210–19.
Smiddy, P.
1993
The status of the otter in east
Cork and west Waterford. Irish Naturalist Journal 25,
236–40.
Southern, H.N. (ed.)
1964
The handbook of British
mammals. Oxford. Blackwell.
Stephens,
M.
1957
The
otter
report.
London.
U.F.A.W.
Thom, T.J., Thomas, C.J., Dunstone, N. and Evans,
P.R.
1998
The relationship between river-
bank
habitat
and
prey
availability
and
the
distribution of otter (Lutra lutra) signs: an analysis
using a geographical information system. In N.
Dunstone and M. Gorman (eds), Behaviour and
ecology of riparian mammals, 135–58. Symposium of
the Zoological Society of London, 71. Cambridge
University Press.
Wallace,
J.L.
1995
The
interaction
between
forestry and freshwater ecosystems in south west
Ireland.
Unpublished
MSc.
thesis,
University
College Cork.
Webb, J.B.
1975
Food of the otter (Lutra lutra) on
the Somerset levels. Journal of Zoology, London 177,
486–91.
Webb,
J.B.
1976
Otter
spraint
analysis.
An
occasional publication of the Mammal Society.
Weber,
J.M.
1990
Seasonal
exploitation
of
amphibians by otter (Lutra lutra) in north-east
Scotland. Journal of Zoology, London 220, 641–51.
Wise, M.H.
1978
The feeding ecology of otters
and mink in Devon. Unpublished PhD thesis,
University of Exeter.
Wise, M.H.
1980
The use of ﬁsh vertebrae in scats
for estimating prey size of otters and mink. Journal
of Zoology, London 192, 25–31.
Wise, M.H., Linn, I.J. and Kennedy, C.R.
1981
A
comparison of the feeding biology of mink Mustela
vison and otter Lutra lutra. Journal of Zoology, London
195, 181–213.
Yalden, D.W.
1977
The identiﬁcation of remains in
owl
pellets.
An
occasional
publication
of
the
Mammal Society.
The subvention granted
by the University
College Cork towards
the cost of publication
of papers by members
of its staff is gratefully
acknowledged by the
Royal Irish Academy.
17
