--- 
source: 2004-7.pdf
--- 

Folia Zool. – 53(1): 27–36 (2004)
The impact of methods of fishery management on the diet of otters
(Lutra lutra) 
Luká‰ POLEDNÍK1, René MITRENGA2, Kateﬁina POLEDNÍKOVÁ1 and Bohumír LOJKÁSEK3
1 Department of Zoology and Anthropology, Faculty of Science, Palack˘ University Olomouc, tﬁ. Svobody 26,
771 46 Olomouc, Czech Republic; e-mail: polednici@centrum.cz
2 Department of Ecology, Faculty of Science, Palack˘ University Olomouc, tﬁ. Svobody 26, 771 46 Olomouc,
Czech Republic; e-mail: rendyk@centrum.cz
3 Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 30. dubna 22, 701 03 Ostrava,
Czech Republic; e-mail: Bohumir.Lojkasek@osu.cz
Received 18 April 2003; Accepted 10 March 2004
A b s t r a c t . The diet of the otter (Lutra lutra L.) was assessed through spraint analysis at three
different streams in the Beskydy Mountains (north-east Czech Republic) and compared with fish
availability and river management procedures. The remains of 3 478 prey items were recorded
in 894 spraints, collected between May 2000 and May 2002. Fish were the dominant species
taken (90%), followed by amphibians (50%). The most frequently occurring species of fish were
the Carpathian sculpin Cottus poecilopus (71%) and brown trout Salmo trutta m. fario (65%).
The composition of the otter’s diet tended to reflect the fish availability (biomass) in streams.
Despite the general similarity of the different streams studied, diet composition differed
significantly. The differences in diet could be explained by differences in fishery management
(stocking) together with the location of migration barriers. 
Key words: food availability, trout streams, spraint analysis, electro-fishing, Beskydy Mountains
Introduction
Over recent decades, the diet of otters has been studied in many western and northern
European countries (e.g. E r l i n g e 1967, C h a n i n 1981, A d r i a n & D e l i b e s
1987, K r u u k & M o o r h o u s e 1990, B e j a 1991), and also in Central and Eastern
Europe (e.g. K e m e n e s & N e c h a y 1990, B r z e z i n s k i et al. 1992) see also
reviews in M a s o n & M a c d o n a l d (1986) and C a r s s (1995). Only a few studies,
however, have simultaneously compared otter diet with food availability (e.g. K o Ï e n á et
al. 1992, D u r b i n 1997, C a r s s et al. 1998, R o c h e 2001 for lowland sites). These
studies tend to confirm an opportunistic feeding style for otters. With increasing otter
populations in Central Europe, there is an increasing conflict arising between fisheries,
angling, and species conservation. Otters are blamed for considerable losses of commercial
fish stocks in different habitats, including trout streams. However, the fish assemblages in
many rivers and streams of Central Europe, and other areas, are strongly influenced through
fishery and riverine management. Despite this, the impact of different forms of management
on otter diet has not yet been studied. This paper presents results from the Beskydy Mts
(north-east Czech Republic) on the diet of otters, as indicated by spraint (faeces) analysis,
and compares this with the availability of fish as affected by differing forms of river and
fisheries management.
27


Study Area
The Beskydy Mountains form the outer part of the western Carpathian mountain range and
are located on the border between the Czech Republic, Poland and the Slovak Republic.
Otters living in this area form the eastern edge of the large Eastern European population,
overlapping from Slovakia and Poland into the Czech Republic, and are presently separated
from other otter populations in the Czech Republic (K u ã e r o v á et al. 2001). The
population in the Beskydy Mountains is estimated at around 15 to 20 adult individuals
(G r e n d z i o k & L o j k á s e k 1995) and the population density at around 1-2 ind/100
km2; the reproduction rate is believed to be low (G r e n d z i o k et al. 1998). 
Otter spraints were collected from the banks of three medium-sized rivers belonging to
the River Ol‰e catchment in the eastern part of the Beskydy Mts. All three rivers are
permanently inhabited by otters and form the core area of otter distribution in the Czech part
28
Fig. 1. Map of the study area with location of spraint collection sites, electro-fished stretches, and barriers for
migration of fish.


of the Beskydy Mts, with reproduction repeatedly recorded (W r ó b e l 1993,
G r e n d z i o k & L o j k á s e k 1995). 
The Hluchová Stream arises at 840 m a.s.l. and joins the River Ol‰e near the village of
Bystﬁice (330 m a.s.l.; 49° 38’ N, 18° 43’E). It has a drainage basin of 37.9 km2, a total
length of 12.3 km and an average discharge at its confluence of 0.78 m3s-1. The Lomná
Stream arises at 870 m a.s.l. and joins the River Ol‰e at the village of Jablunkov (380 m
a.s.l.; 49° 35’N, 18° 45’E). It has a catchment area of 70.9 km2, a total length of 17.6 km and
an average discharge of 1.49 m3s-1. The Kopytná Stream arises at 920 m a.s.l. and joins the
River Ol‰e near the village of Bystﬁice (328 m a.s.l.; 49° 38’ N, 18° 43’E). It has a total
length of 9.1 km. The streams have a mountainous character with average slope of 4.2%.
The bottom deposit in riffle areas is of gravely substrate of 0.5 to 0.2 m, whereas in pools
gravels of 0.05 to 0.1 m prevail. Fluctuating precipitation in the area causes high differences
in water flows throughout the year and continuous reshaping of riverbeds. The banks are
partially improved and widths vary between 2 to 10 m. 
Several artificial gradient drops (weirs) interrupt the course of the streams and the height
of weirs affects the possibility of upstream migration of fish (Table 1). Only a few allow
upstream migration of brown trout, and none one allow migration of other bottom dwelling
fish. The location of weirs differs amongst the streams studied (Fig. 1), thereby significantly
affecting local fish communities. 
Local angling associations presently manage the fish assemblages within the Hluchová and
Lomná streams, however, no fisheries management has been carried out on the Kopytná
stream since 1997. The tributaries of the Hluchová and Lomná streams are used for breeding
(no angling allowed). These are stocked in spring with 0+ fry of brown trout (Salmo trutta m.
fario) and grayling (Thymallus thymallus) and 1+ fish are harvested by electro-fishing in the
following spring. The Hluchová and Lomná streams are stocked with brown trout of 10–20 cm
in size for angling purposes, with angling allowed between 16th April and 
30th November. The fish are stocked at several randomly chosen points along all the course of
the streams. The average stocking density of brown trout for the Hluchová stream is about 
650 ind/ha, and only about 400 ind/ha for the Lomná stream. The annual fish harvest (fish
caught by angling) varies between 25–125 ind/ha (5–25 kg/ha) of brown trout for both streams.
Methods
S p r a i n t  a n a l y s i s
Fresh spraints were collected from the banks of the three study localities at one-monthly
intervals between May 2000 and May 2002 (Fig. 1). 
Before analysis, the spraints were soaked for several hours in detergent and then washed
through a sieve (0.5 mm pore diameter). Fish species were identified according to the keys of
29
Table 1. The size of artificial gradient drops (weirs) as found along the studied streams (left downstream end). For
location of individual barriers see in Fig. 1.  
stream
Height of weirs (cm)
Hluchová
140
90
110
150
130
130
150
150
600
Kopytná
180
130
170
240
Lomná
130
150
200
40
130
50
90
70
40
70
80
110
60
40
30
50


L i b o i s et al. 1987, L i b o i s & H a l l e t - L i b o i s 1988, C o n r o y et al. 1993,
K n o l l s e i s e n 1996 and by comparison of the hard remains (jaw bones, pharyngeal teeth,
vertebrae, and scales) with a reference collection. Other vertebrates were determined from
skeletal remains, teeth, hair and feathers. Invertebrates were identified from their integuments.
The diet composition is presented as relative frequency of occurrence (RFO – number of
occurrences of a prey category divided by the number of occurrences of all prey categories)
and frequency of occurrence (FO – number of occurrences of a prey category divided by the
total number of spraints). Despite several problems associated with this method, it generally
gives a reasonable estimate of the ‘relative importance’ of various dietary elements in the diet
(E r l i n g e 1968, J a c o b s e n & H a n s e n 1996, C a r s s & P a r k i n s o n 1996).
Both fish and amphibians have single and paired bone structures around the head (e.g.
dentary, maxillary, premaxillary bones, and pharyngeal or jaw structures) that allow an
assessment of the minimum number of individuals in a collection through the pairing of left
and right sided bones of the same size. Therefore, the importance of prey categories in the
diet of otters is also presented as relative abundance (RA – number of individuals of a prey
category divided by the total number of individuals of all prey categories). The minimum
number of individuals was scored either on the basis of the number of left and right-sided
unpaired head bones and paired bones of the same size found in a spraint or, where these
were not available, vertebrae of clearly differing sizes or scales from different age groups.
When vertebrae or scales of the same size or age were found in a sample, the number of
individuals of a particular species was scored as one. For comparison of diet and fish
availability, only those spraint samples were used which were collected six weeks before
and six weeks after electro-fishing. In the case of the Lomná stream, the spraint samples
collected in August, September and October were used. 
E l e c t r o - f i s h i n g
Three 100 m long stretches of river were electro-fished in the spring and autumn of 2000 and
2001 respectively on the Hluchová stream, and one 100 m stretch in the autumn of 2000 on
the Kopytná stream (Fig. 1). Each stretch was always electro-fished twice, following the
standard procedure of S e b e r & L e C r e n (1967). All fish of both runs were determined
to species level, the number of individuals counted, and the total biomass for each species
calculated. For each stretch, both the total abundance and biomass, and abundance and
biomass of each species, were estimated according to S e b e r & L e C r e n (1967). No
electro-fishing was carried out on the Lomná stream due to bank and bottom improvements;
the data on fish abundance and biomass being obtained from H a r t v i c h (1997).
S t a t i s t i c a l  a n a l y s i s
All invertebrates occurring in the diet, except crayfish, were excluded from statistical
analysis due to the possibility of secondary ingestion. 
The diversity of the otters’ diet, and that of the fish assemblages on the electro-
fished stretches, was calculated using the Shannon-Wiener index of diversity (log base 2;
K r e b s 1998).
All other statistical tests were implemented only on those prey categories exceeding 5%
of RFO in at least one season. The overall diet (number of individuals) at all three streams
was compared using the log-likelihood ratio test (Z a r 1999). The Kruskal-Wallis test,
30


nonparametric multiple comparison, or the Mann-Whitney test (Z a r 1999) were used to
test for significant differences in the number of individuals of the main prey categories in
the diet between sites. Spearman’s rank order correlation test (Z a r 1999) was used to
compare the diet (expressed as FO) with fish biomass available in the streams (C a r s s &
P a r k i n s o n 1996) whenever possible. The log-likelihood ratio test (Z a r 1999) was
used to compare fish abundance between the Hluchová and Lomná streams.
Results
Assessment of otter diet was based upon the analysis of 894 spraints (Table 2), yielding 3 478
prey items from 27 prey categories (Table 3).
Differences were found in numbers of spraints collected in different seasons at different
streams. Whereas at Kopytná the seasonal peak was found in autumn, two peaks were found
at Hluchová and Lomná streams – in spring and autumn. 
O v e r a l l  d i e t
Fish dominated the diet of otters, followed by amphibians, and invertebrates (FO = 94 %, 
50 %, 21 % respectively). Other vertebrates were not important, with mammals occurring in
1.7 %, reptiles (grass snake - Natrix natrix) in 0.6 % and birds in 0.1 % of spraints. Apart
31
Table 2. Number of otter spraints collected and analysed from the three streams in the study area.
Stream
Spring
Summer
Autumn
Winter
Total
Hluchová
126
81
97
54
358
Lomná
120
96
120
64
400
Kopytná
22
39
61
14
136
Total
268
216
278
132
894
Table 3. Overall diet of otters at different streams; FO – frequency of occurrence, RFO  - relative frequency of
occurrence, RA – relative abundance. All results above 5 % marked in bold.
Kopytná
Hluchová
Lomná
FO
RFO
RA
FO
RFO
RA
FO
RFO
RA
Salmonidae
57.4
21.5
20.6
72.1
30.6
37.0
60.3
27.5
19.1
Thymallus thymallus
12.5
4.7
4.2
2.5
1.1
0.8
0.8
0.3
0.2
Gobio gobio
2.2
0.8
0.8
1.4
0.6
0.6
-
-
-
Leuciscus sp.
1.5
0.6
0.4
1.7
0.7
0.7
0.3
0.1
0.1
Chondrostoma nasus
0.7
0.3
0.4
-
-
-
-
-
-
Phoxinus phoxinus
14.0
5.2
5.6
0.6
0.2
0.3
-
-
-
Rutilus rutilus
1.5
0.6
0.4
1.4
0.6
1.3
-
-
-
Tinca tinca
-
-
-
0.6
0.2
0.2
-
-
-
Other Cyprinidae
4.4
1.7
1.2
4.5
1.9
1.7
1.5
0.7
0.4
Barbatula barbatula
33.8
12.7
12.8
7.5
3.2
2.7
1.0
0.5
0.2
Cottus poecilopus
72.1
27.0
33.8
48.6
20.6
20.6
90.0
41.1
63.3
Unidentified fish
-
-
-
1.1
0.5
0.3
-
-
-
Mammalia
1.5
0.6
0.4
1.1
0.5
0.3
2.3
1.0
0.5
Aves
-
-
-
0.3
0.1
0.1
-
-
-
Reptilia
-
-
-
-
-
-
1.3
0.6
0.3
Anura
46.3
17.4
12.6
70.7
30.0
22.9
33.8
15.4
7.5
Invertebrata
19.1
7.1
6.8
21.5
9.1
10.6
27.8
12.7
8.5


from the larvae of Trichoptera, occurring in 9.4 % of spraints, remains of molluscs (Mollusca;
FO = 2.8 %), crayfish (Astacus astacus; FO = 1.8 %), larvae of water beetles (Dytiscus sp.;
FO = 1.9 %) and low numbers of a further seven taxa of invertebrates were found in spraints. 
The Carpathian sculpin (Cottus poecilopus) and brown trout were the most important
fish species (together RA = 70 %), with a further eight fish species identified in low
numbers (Table 3). 
C o m p a r i s o n  o f  s t r e a m s
A comparison of the main prey categories revealed significant differences in the overall diet at
all three streams (G = 749.2, df = 8, p < 0.001). The diversity of prey categories within the diet
was highest at the Kopytná stream (H’= 2.5), with five main prey categories, followed by the
Hluchová stream (H’= 2.2), and the Lomná stream (H’= 1.3) with only three main prey
categories. Brown trout was the most important prey at the Hluchová stream, whilst sculpin was
the most important prey species at the Lomná and Kopytná streams. Amphibians were third
most important prey category at all three streams. The proportion of grayling in the diet did not
differ between all three streams, nor did the proportion of brown trout and frogs between the
Lomná and the Kopytná streams and the proportion of stone loach (Barbatula barbatula)
between the Hluchová and the Lomná streams. In all other cases, the comparison between
different prey categories and between streams revealed significant differences (Table 4).
F i s h  a v a i l a b i l i t y  i n  s t r e a m s  c o m p a r e d  w i t h  o t t e r  d i e t
The most diverse fish composition was found at the Kopytná stream, with brown trout,
sculpin, stone loach, minnow and grayling (H’ = 1.98). Only two fish species occurred in the
electro-fished catches at the Hluchová stream, brown trout and sculpin (H’ = 0.93). The same
also holds true for the Lomná stream (H a r t v i c h 1997). A comparison of fish composition
between the Hluchová and Lomná streams revealed significant differences between both
streams (G = 8.7, df = 1, p < 0,01), brown trout constituting a higher proportion of total fish
abundance at the Hluchová stream than at Lomná (Table 5).
A positive correlation between FO of fish species in spraints and biomass of fish species
in the stream was found at Kopytná in autumn 2000 (rs = 0.93, df = 7, p < 0.05), and at
Hluchová in spring 2000 (rs = 1, df = 6, p < 0.01) and autumn 2001 (rs = 0.74, df = 9, 
p < 0.05), though no correlation was found at the Hluchová stream in spring 2001. No
statistical test was possible for autumn 2000 at the Hluchová and the Lomná Streams. 
32
Table 4. Statistical comparison of otter diet between different streams (H = Hluchová, K = Kopytná, L = Lomná).
G =log-likelihood ratio test; Hc = Kruskal-Wallis test; Q = nonparametric multiple comparison; Z = Mann-
Whitney test; NS = no significant difference; *** p < 0.001.
H x K x L
H x K
H x L
K x L
All species
G = 749.2
***
G= 151.7
***
G= 54.9
***
G= 292.3
***
Salmonidae
Hc= 26.3
***
Q=
4.1
***
Q=
4.4
***
Q=
1.0
NS
Cottus poecilopus
Hc= 257.6
***
Q=
4.5
***
Q= 16.0
***
Q=
7.1
***
Anura
Hc= 82.7
***
Q=
4.4
***
Q=
9.0
***
Q=
2.1
NS
Barbatula barbatula
Hc= 33.4
***
Q=
4.6
***
Q=
1.6
NS
Q=
5.8
***
Thymallus thymallus
Hc=
4.3
NS
--
--
--
Phoxinus phoxinus
--
Z=
6.6
***
--
--


In three cases at the Hluchová Stream (spring 2000, 2001 and autumn 2000), the rank
order of sculpin and brown trout in the stream and in the diet were the same; only in autumn
2001 was the rank order reversed. At the Lomná stream, the rank order of sculpin and brown
trout in the stream and in the diet was also reversed. (Fig. 2)
Discussion
The results of spraint analysis, showing fish as the most frequent prey of the otter, followed
by amphibians, and other prey categories taken in low quantities, generally agrees with 
a number of earlier findings (e.g. E r l i n g e 1967, C h a n i n 1981, B e j a 1991). The
present study also showed a fish species composition in the diet in concordance with other
studies from the Carpathians Mountains, where brown trout and sculpin dominate the diet
(e.g. K o Ï e n á et al. 1992, H a r n a 1993, G r e n d z i o k & L o j k á s e k 1994). 
Despite the broad similarity of the streams studied, both in general appearance and main
features, otter diet composition varied significantly. This may be explained through differences
33
Table 5. Summary of results of electro-fishing of each stream (data for the Lomná stream from H a r t v i c h
1997), the number of individuals and the biomass are expressed per hectare of water surface. 
Stream
Period
Salmo 
Cottus          Barbatula 
Phoxinus 
Thymallus 
trutta          poecilopus      barbatula         phoxinus          thymallus
ind.
kg
ind.
kg
ind.
kg
ind.
kg
ind.
kg
Kopytná
Autumn 2000
3409
220
5514
47
544
24
4752
21
1134
14
Hluchová
Spring 2000
1247
66
2957
25
Hluchová
Autumn 2000
1858
76
5315
65
Hluchová
Spring 2001
1209
45
1770
22
Hluchová
Autumn 2001
1587
113
2366
19
Lomná
Autumn 1997
305
20
1087
9
Fig. 2. Comparison of main fish species in otter diet (RFO; 364 spraints) and fish availability (biomass) at the
different streams.


in fish abundance, diversity, and biomass. In all three streams, the diet of otters tended to
reflect these differences, with fish species occurring in the diet in relative proportion to their
availability, although with sculpin taken slightly more often than availability would suggest,
and trout slightly less, especially at the Kopytná stream (Fig. 2). This latter fact could be
explained as an artefact caused by under- or over-estimation of prey items when using the
spraint analysis method (see C a r s s & P a r k i n s o n 1996). Another explanation, however,
could be a preference for feeding on the slower moving sculpin.
The main factors causing the differences in fish assemblages at the streams are the
management practices of the local angling association and the location of migration barriers
(Fig. 1). A lack of fishery management, together with an absence of migration barriers, in
the lower stretch of the Kopytná stream results in a more ‘natural’ fish community, with free
migration of smaller species in particular (Table 5). At the Hluchová stream, in three out of
four samplings, the diet of otters corresponded to availability. However, the results for
spring 2001, and the rank order of brown trout and sculpin at the Lomná stream, did not
follow this pattern. In the case of the Lomná stream, however, the data on fish availability
used were four years old and changes in fish composition could have occurred between
1997 and 2000. The explanation of this discrepancy for the Hluchová stream remains
unclear. A difference in stocking density of brown trout at the Hluchová and Lomná streams
also results in a difference in predation pressure on sculpin. Sculpin occur in higher numbers
and biomass in the Lomná stream, where stocking of trout is lower. Here again, the diet of
otters followed availability and sculpin occurred in the diet in higher numbers at the Lomná
stream than at the Hluchová stream. 
The regular stocking of high densities of brown trout in the Hluchová and Lomná
streams imposes a high predation pressure on small fish species, causing local depletion of
their populations and, consequently, a relative ‘increase’ in the availability of trout to the
otter. Due to the migration barriers downstream, no immigration of new individuals from the
River Ol‰e is possible and the populations are slowly driven to extinction. Thus the fish
community in these two streams is composed almost entirely of brown trout and sculpin (see
Table 5 and H a r t v i c h 1997). Despite trout not having been stocked in the Kopytná
stream since 1997, higher numbers of trout and sculpin were found in this stream than the
others (Table 5). It is possible that, as smaller fish disappear from the latter streams, older
trout turn to cannibalism to supplement sculpin in their diet. Unfortunately, no stomach
contents were analysed to prove or disprove this. Alternatively, spraint sampling indicated
two peaks at both the Hluchová and Lomná streams (spring and autumn), unlike the
Kopytná stream where there was only one peak in autumn, as observed in other studies (e.g.
M a c d o n a l d & M a s o n 1987). The high annual stocking of trout, and their higher
relative abundance to other species, at the former sites may be encouraging otters to feed
heavily on these fish in spring; conversely, the wider diversity of slower prey at the
Kopytná, and the lack of downstream migration barriers, allowing free movement of trout
and other species in and out of the river, may reduce such predation and allow trout
populations to grow.
The fish composition in the diet, therefore, generally corresponds to fish availability in
the streams. These results support earlier assumptions (e.g. M a s o n & M a c d o n a l d
1986, C a r s s 1995) as well as findings stating that otters take prey species in proportion to
their availability in the environment (K e m e n e s & N e c h a y 1990, K o Ï e n á et al
1992, D u r b i n 1997, C a r s s et al. 1998). The occasional presence of other fish species in
34


the diet at these streams, in low numbers, can be explained either by the inefficiency of
electro-fishing for small and/or bottom living species, or as a result of the otter eating an item
caught at another site and later sprainting in the study area. Otters are able to move over
considerable distances, often within short periods (G r e e n et al. 1984, D u r b i n 1993,
own unpublished data), and the distances between the study localities and the River Ol‰e is
short enough to explain this effect. 
There is evidence; therefore, to show that recent fisheries management, consisting of the
stocking of high densities of brown trout, together with habitat fragmentation, can affect non-
target fish species. Such management decreases the overall availability of these fish species
in streams and, because otters tend to eat prey in proportions similar to those available in the
environment, they are forced to feed mostly on commercial fish species. Further, migration
barriers and high densities of ‘enclosed’ prey may actually encourage otters (and other
predators, including piscivorous fish) to increase their predation beyond what might be
termed a ‘normal’ level. A change in management practices, to include the protection or
restocking of non-target species, spreading the stocking of trout over a wider area or time
period, together with habitat restoration (e.g. fish passes), could increase local populations of
non-target species. Such additional food may result in a reduction of otter predation on
commercial fish, resulting in a decrease in economic damage and the resulting conflict.
A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s
We are especially grateful to A. K r a n z and K. R o c h e for their criticisms on the manuscript and P. D r o z d
for his advices concerning statistics. The study was financed by the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic
(206/00/0824), the Czech Otter Foundation Fund, and the Grant Agency of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic (A6093105).
L I T E R A T U R E
ADRIAN M.I. & DELIBES M. 1987: Food habits of the otter (Lutra lutra) in two habitats of the Doñana National
Park, SW Spain. J. Zool. Lond. 212: 399–406.
BEJA P.R. 1991: Diet of otters (Lutra lutra) in closely associated freshwater, brackish and marine habitats in
south-west Portugal. J. Zool. Lond. 225: 141–152.
BRZEZINSKI M., JEDRZEJEWSKI W. & JEDRZEJEWSKA B. 1992: Diet of otters (Lutra lutra) inhabiting
small rivers in the Bialovieza national Park, eastern Poland. J. Zool. Lond. 230: 495–501.
CARSS D.N. 1995: Foraging behaviour and feeding ecology of the otter Lutra lutra: A selective review. Hystrix
(n.s.) 7 (1–2): 179–194.
CARSS D.N. & PARKINSON S.G. 1996: Errors associated with otter Lutra lutra faecal analysis. I. Assessing
general diet from spraints. J. Zool. Lond. 238: 301–317.
CARSS D.N., NELSON K.C., BACON P.J. & KRUUK H. 1998: Otter (Lutra lutra) prey selection in relation to
fish abundance and community structure in two different freshwater habitats. In: Dunstone N. & Gorman
M.L. (eds), Behaviour and ecology of riparian mammals. Symp. Zool. Soc. Lond. No. 71: 190–213.
CHANIN P. 1981: The diet of the otter and its relations with feral mink in two areas of south-east England. Acta
Theriol. 26: 83–95.
CONROY J.W.H., WATT J., WEBB J.B. & JONES A. 1993: A guide to the identification of prey remains in otter
spraint. An occasional publication of the Mammal Society. No. 16, Reading.
DURBIN L.S. 1993: Food and habitat utilisation of otters (Lutra lutra L.) in a riparian habitat. PhD Thesis,
University of Aberdeen. 
DURBIN L.S. 1997: Composition of salmonid species in the estimated diet of otter (Lutra lutra) and in electro-
fished catches. J. Zool. Lond. 243: 821–825.
35


ERLINGE S. 1967: Food habits of the fish-otter (Lutra lutra L.) in South Swedish habitats. Viltrevy 4: 371–443.
ERLINGE S. 1968: Food studies on captive otters Lutra lutra L. Oikos 19: 259–270. 
GREEN J., GREEN R. & JEFFERIES D.J. 1984: A radio-tracking survey of otters Lutra lutra on a Perthshire river
system. Lutra vol. 27: 85–145.
GRENDZIOK P. & LOJKÁSEK B. 1994: K potravû a v˘skytu vydry ﬁíãní (Lutra lutra L.) na území CHKO
Beskydy (On the diet and occurrence of the otter (Lutra lutra) in the Beskydy Protected Landscape Area).
Acta Fac. Rer. Nat. Univ. Ostraviensis (Biologica-Ekologica) 2: 151–157 (in Czech with English summary).
GRENDZIOK P. & LOJKÁSEK B. 1995: K mapování v˘skytu a potravû vydry ﬁíãní (Lutra lutra L.) v oblasti
severov˘chodní Moravy v letech 1993–1995 (On the occurrence and diet of the European otter (Lutra lutra
L.) in north-east Morava). Bulletin Vydra 6/1995: 45–52 (in Czech with English summary).
GRENDZIOK P., KOR≈AN J. & LOJKÁSEK B. 1998: K mapování v˘skytu a potravû vydry ﬁíãní (Lutra lutra
L.) na rozhraní âeské republiky, Slovenska a Polska v zimû v roce 1996 (Otter (Lutra lutra) survey and diet
study from the trans-frontier areas of the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland). Bulletin Vydra 8/1998: 3–16
(in Czech with English summary).
HARNA G. 1993: Diet composition of the otter Lutra lutra in the Bieszczady Mountains, south-east Poland. Acta
Theriol. 38(2): 167–174.
HARTVICH P. 1997: Ochrana ichtyofauny a moÏnosti revitalizace upraveného toku Lomné [The fish composition
of the Lomná River and the possibilities of its revitalisation]. Report for the PLA Beskydy (in Czech). 
JACOBSEN L. & HANSEN H.M. 1996: Analysis of otter (Lutra lutra) spraints: Part 1: Comparison of methods
to estimate prey proportions; Part 2: Estimation of the size of prey fish. J. Zool., Lond. 238: 167–180. 
KEMENES I. & NECHAY G. 1990: The food of otters Lutra lutra in different habitats in Hungary. Acta Theriol.
35: 17–24.
KNOLLSEISEN M. 1996: Fischbestimmungsatlas als Grundlage für nahrungsökologische Untersuchungen.
BOKU – Reports on Wildlife Research and Game Management. Institute für Wildbiologie und Jagdwirtschaft:
Universität für Bodenkultur Wien 12, 93 pp.
KOÎENÁ I., URBAN P., ·TOURAâOVÁ I. & MAZUR I. 1992: The diet of the otter (Lutra lutra Linn.) in the
Poºana Protected Landscape Region. Folia Zool. 11(2): 107–122.
KUâEROVÁ M., ROCHE K. & TOMAN A. 2001: Roz‰íﬁení vydry ﬁíãní (Lutra lutra) v âeské republice (The
occurrence of otter (Lutra lutra) in the Czech Republic). Bulletin Vydra 11/2001: 37–39 (in Czech with
English summary).
KREBS CH.J. 1998: Ecological methodology (2nd ed.). Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park: 444–445.
KRUUK H. & MOORHOUSE A.1990: Seasonal and spatial differences in food selection by otters (Lutra lutra)
in Shetland. J. Zool. Lond. 224: 41–57.
LIBOIS R.M, HALLET-LIBOIS C. & ROSOUX R. 1987: Élements pour l’identification des restes craniens des
poissons dulcaquicoles de Belgique et du nord de la France. In: Desse J. & Desse-Berset N. (eds); Fiches
d’ostéologie animale pour l’archéologie, Série A, No. 3. Centre de Recherches Archéologiques du CNRS,
Belgium (in French).
LIBOIS R.M. & HALLET-LIBOIS C. 1988: Élements pour l’identification des restes craniens des poissons
dulcaquicoles de Belgique et du nord de la France. In: Desse J. & Desse-Berset N. (eds); Fiches d’ostéologie
animale pour l’archéologie, Série A, No. 4. Centre de Recherches Archéologiques du CNRS, Belgium (in
French).
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1987: Seasonal marking in an otter population. Acta Theriol. 32: 449–462.
MASON C.F. & MACDONALD S.M. 1986: Otters: Ecology and Conservation. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
ROCHE K. 2001: Sprainting behaviour, diet and foraging strategy of otters (Lutra lutra) in the TﬁeboÀsko
Protected Landscape Area & Biosphere Reserve [Znaãkovací chování, potrava a potravní strategie vydry ﬁíãní
(Lutra lutra L.) na území CHKO a BR TﬁeboÀsko]. PhD Thesis, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Brno.
SEBER F. & LECREN E.D. 1967: Estimating population parameters from large catches relative to the population.
J.Anim.Ecol. 36: 631–643.
WRÓBEL J. 1993: O vydﬁe na horním toku ﬁeky Ol‰e [Otter in the upper catchment of the River Ol‰e]. Myslivost
12/1993: 6–7(in Czech).
ZAR J.H. 1999: Biostatistical Analysis (4th ed.). Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
36
