--- 
source: 2005-28.pdf
--- 

Otters of Chile 
EXPEDITION BRIEFING 
 


 
 
1
 
 
 
 
Dear Volunteer, 
Welcome to the Otters of Chile expedition!  We have already completed five years working with 
Earthwatch volunteers, and with their help we succeeded in accomplishing tasks that before we 
could only dream of. We have completed four years of radio tracking southern river otters (Lontra 
provocax), locally known as huillín. To do this, we had to build a research station close to the 
riverhead of the Queule river, and we suffered floods and had to work overnight under heavy 
rain and freezing cold. Volunteers sometimes were able to see several river otters, other times not 
many at all.   
At the moment, Renato Reyes, a Ph.D. student, Maximilano Sepulveda, José Luis Bartheld and 
Cesar Gonzalez, three former undergraduate students, are working on analyzing all the 
information obtained during the past five year in order to publish our results. So far, we have 
already published the preliminary survey results (titled “Reversible ketamine-medetomidine 
anesthesia in wild southern river otters (Lontra provocax),” part of the degree dissertation of Vera 
Kaufman that was sent to the editor committee of the IXth Int. Otter Colloquium. In Vera’s 
research we documented the effect of river canalization and riparian vegetation removal on the 
otter use of rivers and streams, and in Claudio Soto’s research we documented the first study on 
anesthesia in the southern river otter. Claudio Soto obtained his Veterinary degree with this 
study.   
All the information obtained is of enormous value to the conservation of the southern river otter, 
and for the first time in Chilean history we have information about the size or extension of the 
river and its surrounding habitat, which we must think about in order to save this otter species. 
Also for the first time, we have data to support our view of the negative effects on the otters and 
the river ecosystem that the current Chilean river management policy is sustaining.   
However, we haven’t done much about the other species of otter. Although we used resources 
from the Earthwatch Institute project for the southern river otter, so far we haven’t incorporated 
Earthwatch volunteers into the work with the marine otter (Lontra felina). The marine otter is a 
unique species of otter; together with the sea otter, they are the only exclusively marine otter 
species in the world. But the marine otter is also the smallest marine mammal in the world. Since 
1998 some students and I have been working with this marine otter. We have documented its 
feeding behavior and ecology, but best of all we have been the first research team in history to be 
able to radio track this otter for enough time to understand its home range, core areas and the 
effect of artificial feeding by local fisherman on their spatial behavior. We have discovered that 
we, humans, could be strong competitors to the marine otter; we predate on similar prey species 
and we like to build our houses and villages in the same places where this otter likes to have its 
dens and refuges. So now we are inviting the Earthwatch volunteers to join us in this, our new 
scientific adventure, to survey the marine otter populations from different regions, trap some 
animals to obtain genetic samples and finally discover how the marine otter populations are 
doing considering the high degree of landscape fragmentation. The project research includes both 
species of otter, the southern river otter and the marine otter. However, we are inviting this 
season’s volunteers to help us with the marine otter so we can finish the survey before the end of 
2006. Also, we are sure volunteers will be delighted in observing this small species of otter, as 
marine otters are easy and enjoyable to observe during daylight.   


 
 
2
Your expedition will build on this long-term monitoring of key marine otter populations, will 
contribute to the implementation of distribution maps into practical otter conservation, and thus 
will significantly contribute valuable information to one of the most ambitious Chilean animal 
conservation and research programs ever.  
The work will be demanding, with several long days and some long nights of effort, but will 
provide a rewarding encounter with these fascinating otter species. We look forward to your 
participation in this important otter conservation and monitoring research project. 
Yours sincerely, 
Gonzalo Medina-Vogel, D.M.V., Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
3
Otters of Chile 
Table of Contents 
GENERAL INFORMATION............................................................................................................................ 4 
THE EXPEDITION ............................................................................................................................................ 5 
1.  PROJECT OVERVIEW..................................................................................................................................... 5 
2.  RESEARCH AREA.......................................................................................................................................... 6 
3.  PROJECT STAFF............................................................................................................................................. 7 
DAILY LIFE IN THE FIELD ........................................................................................................................... 9 
4.  TEAM ITINERARY ......................................................................................................................................... 9 
5.  DAILY SCHEDULE AND TASKS...................................................................................................................10 
6.  VOLUNTEER FIELD TRAINING AND ASSIGNMENTS...................................................................................10 
7.  ACCOMMODATIONS....................................................................................................................................11 
8.  FOOD...........................................................................................................................................................11 
TRAVEL PLANNING......................................................................................................................................13 
9.   BEFORE YOU LEAVE.................................................................................................................................13 
10.  HEALTH INFORMATION............................................................................................................................16 
11.  WHAT TO BRING......................................................................................................................................17 
12.  RECOMMENDED READING .......................................................................................................................19 
13.  PROJECT CONDITIONS..............................................................................................................................19 
14.  EMERGENCIES IN THE FIELD ....................................................................................................................21 
15.  HELPFUL RESOURCES ..............................................................................................................................22 
THE RESEARCH..............................................................................................................................................25 
16.  BACKGROUND, OBJECTIVES AND METHODS ..........................................................................................25 
17.  RESULTS AND OPPORTUNITIES................................................................................................................34 
18. LITERATURE CITED ...................................................................................................................................34 


 
 
4
GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: 
(1) Gonzalo Medina-Vogel 
 
 
(2) Juliana de Abreu Vianna 
 
 
POSITION/TITLES: 
(1) Doctor in Veterinary Medicine; Ph.D. in  
 
 
Wildlife Ecology; Chairman of the    
 
 
 
School of Veterinary Medicine  
 
 
(2) Biologist; Master in Wildlife Ecology 
Management and Conservation, PhD Candidate, 
Universidad Católica de Chile; Lecturer of 
Evolution and Applied Genetics 
 
 
 
AFFILIATIONS: 
(1) and (2) Escuela de Medicina Veterinaria,  
 
 
Facultad de Ecología y Recursos Naturales,  
 
 
Universidad Nacional Andrés Bello 
 
 
PROJECT TITLE: 
Otters of Chile: Phylogeography of marine 
otter, Lontra feline, and southern river otter, 
Lontra provocax (Carnivora: Mustelidae), in Chile 
 
 
RESEARCH SITE: 
The Pacific coast of central-north and south 
 
Chile 
 
 
 
TEAM LENGTH: 
14 days 
 
 
TEAM SIZE: 
Minimum: 4 Maximum:  6 
 
 
MINIMUM AGE OF PARTICIPATION: 
16 *See Section 9 ‘Before You Leave’ for  
 
 
 
important information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Briefing Version 1 


 
 
5
THE EXPEDITION 
1.  PROJECT OVERVIEW 
Worldwide there is an increasing concern regarding (1) habitat fragmentation as a result of 
habitat destruction and/or natural or human-made barriers, and (2) the effects of fragmentation 
on the biodiversity of terrestrial plant and animal populations. Habitat fragmentation greatly 
affects species’ dispersal, therefore decreasing a species’ ability to colonize new areas and 
increase the genetic diversity of isolated populations. In addition, sex-biased dispersal prevents 
the mating between close relatives thus avoiding the negative effects of inbreeding. In order to 
understand species distribution patterns, it is necessary to understand species dispersal and how 
it is affected by environmental variables such as natural and human-made barriers. 
This project evaluates the impact of human-made and natural barriers on two aquatic mammals: 
the marine otter (Lontra felina), and the southern river otter (Lontra provocax). These two species 
are listed as Endangered by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and 
little is known about their ecology, population dynamics and conservation issues. These species’ 
historical range has been much reduced because of poaching, habitat destruction and 
disturbance.  
 
Marine Otter 
 
The distribution of the marine otter is presently patchy and limited to inshore waters up to 150 m 
offshore and to a narrow coastal strip up to 30 m inland along the Pacific coast, from Peru to 
Cape Horn. The patchy distribution of marine otter populations north of Chiloe Island (43oS) may 
coincide with the distribution of rocky coastal patches, which are separated by long stretches of 
sandy beach and human settlements. South of Chiloe, marine otter populations may be separated 
by sea channels between the islands. In contrast to sea otters (Enhydra lutris) from the northern 
Pacific and Bering Sea, the marine otter has only recently adapted to living in marine 
environments. While the larger-bodied sea otter, E. lutris, developed several adaptations to living 
in the cold waters of the Northern Hemisphere (i.e., frequent feeding, a high metabolism to 
maintain body heat, and dense and waterproof fur), the smaller-bodied marine otter appears to 
compensate for the heat loss imposed by its cold environment not only by increasing heat 
production, but also by spending less time in the water and only making trips to sea to feed. 
Thus, restrictions due to heat loss may prevent marine otters from crossing sea channels or large 
estuaries between sections of rocky shore. Furthermore, marine otters may be prevented from 
crossing long stretches of sandy beaches by land, because of increased use of these habitats by 
humans and wandering dogs.   
 
Presently, there is no information regarding the effect of habitat patchiness in the rocky littoral 
zone on dispersal patterns and gene flow between populations of marine otter. Given the 
particular distribution of marine otters along the linear coastline and rocky shores of Chile, this 
aquatic mammal is a good candidate for testing the “stepping-stone model” of dispersal.   
 
Southern River Otter 
 
The range of the southern river otter has been reduced to less than 10% of its original extent in 
freshwater habitats. This reduction in range resulted in the presence of isolated populations using 
rivers and lakes from geographically separated basins. However, southern river otter populations 


 
 
6
can also be found in the Chilean southern fiords, where they go out to sea to feed. Previous 
studies by Dr. Medina-Vogel and his team, with the help of Earthwatch volunteers, documented 
ranges for isolated southern river otter populations to be over 25 km long and found that animals 
released after capture moved over 45 km away from the capture site generally following the 
rivers and streams of a single river basin or moving between river basins that are connected to 
the lowlands by rivers or streams. After four years of radio tracking studies, tracked individuals 
were never observed moving from one river basin to another by land or seashore crossing. This 
suggests southern river otter populations may have become highly isolated. Because of the 
natural and human made effects on the distribution of the southern river otter and its use of 
micro-basins as part of one large transversal river basin, this otter species is a good candidate for 
testing the “metapopulation model” of dispersal.  
 
The Hypothesis 
 
Based on the testing of the “stepping-stone model” of dispersal for marine otters and the 
“metapopulation model” of dispersal for southern river otters, our hypotheses are as follows: 
 
(1) There is a restricted gene flow and, therefore, significant genetic differences between 
northern and southern populations of marine otters separated by barriers of extended 
sandy beaches with human settlements. Furthermore, if distances between extended 
rocky patches are too large, gene flow may be null. 
 
(2) There is a restricted gene flow and, therefore, significant genetic differences among (a) 
southern river otter populations from different transversal river basins, and (b) southern 
river otter populations from different micro-basins within a main transversal basin. 
However, the differences in case (b) are expected to be smaller than in case (a). 
Furthermore, if distances between suitable transversal river basins are too large or the 
barrier is complete, gene flow may be null.  
 
To test model predictions we will sample otter populations from study areas between the 25ºS 
and 39ºS latitudes (north, central, and south Chile), using indirect methods (i.e., molecular 
genetics). Two different genetic markers (i.e., the control region of mitochondrial DNA and the 
microsatellite loci) will be used to measure genetic polymorphism and to evaluate the degree of 
gene flow and genetic diversity between populations. This study will be the first to assess the 
susceptibility of otter populations to environmental changes and diseases based on the genetic 
diversity of populations, and will contribute to a better understanding of how humans affect 
animals living in marine and fresh water ecosystems. 
 
Volunteers will be involved in otter trapping, caring for the otters while they are in temporary 
enclosures, and taking blood and skin samples. Volunteers will be working along the most 
beautiful coastline in Chile and, along with the research staff, will camp at specific sites 
authorized for tourist camping.   
2.  RESEARCH AREA 
The 2006 teams will work solely with marine otters along the Chilean coastline. The 
research area will vary depending on the teams and the study area. If the work involves 
surveying the northern areas (Teams V, VI, VII and VIII), the area will be hilly and rocky 
with no close freshwater reservoirs or drinking water and very hot and sunny days. If the 
work involves surveys of the southern areas (Teams I, II, III and IV), the area will be rocky 
and hilly or mountainous. The weather in summertime (December to March) is hot and 


 
 
7
sunny in the north, and is temperate and sunny in the south with a short dry season. In the 
south study areas the mean annual rainfall is up to 2 m/7ft. During spring and autumn 
(September to December and March to June, respectively) the weather is highly variable 
with daytime temperatures between 41ºF (5ºC) and 90ºF (32ºC) and nighttime temperatures 
between 32ºF (0ºC) and 41ºF (5ºC). There are also possibilities of heavy rain and days of sun 
and cold wind in the south study areas. Northern areas of the research site are mostly dry, 
being the south end of the Atacama Desert. The daytime is hot but nights can be chilly. 
 
There are few poisonous insects (spiders, scorpions), however, there are lots of prickly 
plants to which a few persons may be allergic. Mosquitoes can be a nuisance at night 
during spring to autumn teams. Wildlife around the camps is mainly native birds, foxes, 
native rodents, lizards, sometimes non-poisonous snakes and skunks and very rarely 
mountain lions. The campsite will always be close to highways or not further than one 
hour away. 
 
Spanish is the country’s language, but the research staff will speak English with the 
Earthwatch volunteers, unless they wish to practice their Spanish. Chile is a predominantly 
Catholic country with renewed democratic stability.  Generally speaking, Chilean 
countryside is very safe for visitors. In large cities like Santiago, and in airports, bus and 
train stations, care for personal baggage and any valuable articles should be taken.   
3.  PROJECT STAFF 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
Gonzalo Medina-Vogel  D.M.V. Ph.D., 42 years old, Chilean. He has been working with 
river otters and marine otters since 1988 and also has experience with American mink 
(Mustela vison), ferret (Mustela furo) and Chilean dolphin (Cephalorhynchus eutropia). 
Currently, Dr. Medina Vogel is Chairman of the School of Veterinary Medicine of the 
Universidad Andrés Bello, former Latino American Coordinator for the Otter Specialist 
Group of the IUCN/SSC and now Marine Otter Coordinator of the Latino American 
Section of the IUCN/SSC Otter Specialist Group. His interests are carnivore behavior, 
ecology and conservation. He is a lecturer in Conservation Biology, Animal Conservation, 
Conservation Medicine and Landscape Ecology. When there is time, he is also an 
enthusiastic mountain climber, sea kayaker, mountain bike rider, cross-country runner and 
sailor. Languages: Spanish and English. Present for some teams and only for the first three 
days of each team’s expedition. 
 
 
CO-PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
Juliana de Abreu Vianna  Biologist, M.Sc., Ph.D. candidate, 26 years old, Brazilian. She 
has been working with river otters and manatees since 1999 and also has experience with 
pink dolphin (Inia geoffrensis), river dolphin (Sotalia fluviatilis) and freshwater ecology. 
Currently she is an academic at the School of Veterinary Medicine of the Universidad 
Andrés Bello and Ph.D. Candidate at the Univerisdad Católica de Chile. Her interests are 
molecular ecology of wildlife and animal conservation, and she is a lecturer in Evolution, 
Genetic and General Ecology. When there is time, she is an enthusiastic swimmer, surfer, 
diver and sailor. Languages: Portuguese, Spanish and English. Present for some teams. 
 


 
 
8
RESEARCH STAFF   
René Enrique Monsalve Alarcón, Field Assistant, 38 years old. He has been working with 
river otters and marine otters since 1991, with Earthwatch teams since 2000, and has been 
leading teams since 2004. He  also has experiences with Darwin’s fox (Pseudalopex fluvipes). 
His interests are natural history, carnivore behavior, ecology and animal conservation. He 
is an enthusiastic mountain bike rider and fisherman. Languages:  Spanish and English. 
Present for all teams. 
 
Claudio Alejandro Soto Azat, Veterinarian, 25 years old. He has been working with river 
otters and marine otters since 2004, and also works with zoo animals. His specialization is 
trapping, handling and anesthesia of wildlife for veterinary purposes. He is a lecturer in 
Veterinary Pharmacology. Languages: Spanish and English. Present for all teams. 
 
Current staffing schedule is as follows (subject to change): 
Staff Member Present 
Team 
I 
Team 
II 
Team 
III 
Team 
IV 
Team 
V 
Team 
VI 
Team 
VII 
Team 
VIII 
Gonzalo Medina Vogel 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Juliana de Abreu Vianna 
X 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
René Monsalve Alarcón 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Claudio Soto Azat 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 


 
 
9
DAILY LIFE IN THE FIELD 
4.  TEAM ITINERARY 
Volunteers should be aware that schedules can and do fluctuate. Weather and work 
conditions can affect the daily schedule. Should this situation arise, your cooperation and 
understanding are appreciated. 
 
Day 1:   
1100: Meet at the airport  
• 
Teams I, II, III, and IV: Carriel Sur Airport in Concepcion 
• 
Teams V, VI, VII, and VIII: La Florida Airport in La Serena 
 
 
Transport to base camp station 
 
 
Introduce the volunteers to their accommodation facilities and to the staff 
 
 
Relaxing lunch or afternoon tea, free time depending on the hour 
 
 
Introductory informal conversations 
 
Days 2:  
0800: Wakeup and breakfast 
 
 
Formal introductory speech and introduction to the work 
 
 
Field group formation and task planning 
 
 
0900-1200: Group A travel to survey area 
 
 
0900-1400: Group B prepare traps, cages and material for sampling 
 
 
1200-1400: Lunch in the camp 
 
 
1400-2000: Group B carry on surveys 
 
 
2000-2200: Group A prepare traps, cages and material for sampling 
 
 
2000-2300: Dinner 
 
Day 3:    
0900-2200: Groups A and B work setting up traps 
 
 
1200-1400: Lunch in the field 
 
 
2000-2300: Dinner at campsite 
 
Day 4 to 14: 
0900-2200: Groups A and B work checking traps every 6 to 12 hours  
0900-2200: Groups A and B carry on daily surveys collecting fresh otter 
scats for genetic analysis 
 
 
1200-1400: Lunch in the field 
 
 
2000-2300: Dinner at campsite 
 
Day 15:  
End of the Earthwatch team 
1030: Transport the volunteers to airport or the nearest bus station 
 
Volunteers should consult a travel guidebook for information on local attractions. See Section 15 
‘Helpful Resources’. 
During the first day of each team there will be time for introductions and to have a comfortable 
chat about the project, conservation, otters, rivers, the area, why volunteers decided to participate 
in this project, introduction of the staff, the PI, the country and South America. Every day all 
volunteers and staff will cooperate in the cooking of meals. In general, it will be a camping type 
environment. It is suggested that volunteers bring a book or board games in case of heavy rain. 
During these times, most fieldwork must be suspended. 


 
 
10
5.  DAILY SCHEDULE AND TASKS 
Note: Please read Section 4 ‘Team Itinerary’ to associate the following daily tasks to the daily 
schedule. 
Surveys 
Groups doing surveys will leave the camps as early as possible depending on the distance 
to travel to the survey site and area. After arrival, there will be a light meal and volunteers 
will have to walk, following seashores, looking for otter field signs (scats). Depending on 
the distance between survey areas, there will be more than one survey per day. Dinner will 
be at the camps.  
 
Otter Trapping and Care 
This is the most difficult and sometimes the most rewarding of the project activities. 
Trapping otters is difficult and frustrating, sometimes taking a day to trap the first otter, 
sometimes taking more than a month to trap the first otter. Here volunteers will begin the 
day checking up all traps at 0600 hrs.   
 
Otter Sampling 
Blood samples will be taken from trapped otters. This will be done by the veterinarian with 
the help of the volunteers.  
6.  VOLUNTEER FIELD TRAINING AND ASSIGNMENTS 
“I had a fantastic time with my team, volunteers and staff …This was a life-changing experience for me – I’d love to 
do it again.” 
– Amy Innes Wilson, Team II, March 2004 
 
At the beginning of each field trip, volunteers will have a talk about all activities they will be involved in 
and the importance of the exactitude of their observations and results. 
 
Volunteers will participate directly in each field activity. They will work side by side with PIs, field 
assistant and students, due to the amount of work needed in this project. Volunteers will participate 
every day in all activities, from setting up traps, checking them daily, removing otters from traps, helping 
with taking animal body measurements, sampling, surveying for trapping sites, and cooking for the 
teams. 
 
The PIs will give the team a more detailed on-site project briefing when you arrive. 
  
• 
Assignment 1: Surveys. Walking with the PIs and any field team member along seashore 
looking for otter scats or any otter field sign. 
• 
Assignment 2: Set up otter traps. Work day and night with any field team members or 
students helping them in setting up traps. Traps for marine otter are set up on rocks so 
they need cables and rock anchors. All traps for marine otter are settled over a distance 
no larger than 6 kilometers. Each trap takes about one hour to set up.  
• 
Assignment 3: Monitoring traps. Marine otter traps are checked every 4-6 hours, night or 
day, so if traps are far from the campsite, volunteers and one field team member 


 
 
11
(veterinarian) will stay close to the traps to check them during the time needed to trap at 
least four otters per site.  
• 
Assignment 4: Sampling. When one otter is captured, it is immediately removed from 
the trap after it is sedated. The field team member onsite will lead the action. Volunteers 
will help in anything needed, from handing over the syringes, finding a blanket to cover 
the otter, carrying the otter after sedated and taking the container with the sample. The 
otter also needs to be measured and cheeked for body conditions and injuries before 
being released.   
• 
Assignment 5: Otter keeping. Although it is not likely, in the case that an otter has to be 
kept in captivity during a short time, volunteers will help in the feeding and cleaning of 
the otter enclosure.   
• 
Assignment 6: Cooking and cleaning. All volunteers as well as field team members are 
responsible of cooking and cleaning at the campsite. 
7.  ACCOMMODATIONS 
The marine otter study sites follow the seashore, but most of them are not in regular touristy 
places, so campsites are sometimes only a place to set up the tents.  Teams I, II, III and IV will 
locate their campsite in wild areas with no toilet/shower facilities or freshwater supplies.  Camp 
showers (an elevated bag full of sun-warmed water) will be provided, and volunteers will be 
instructed on how to dig their own “toilet” hole in an environmentally friendly manner. Teams 
V, VI, VII and VIII will locate their tents in very simple camping areas, and may have more access 
to toilet/shower facilities. The provided tents are small and portable to accommodate teams 
moving from site to site. 
The transport to the field, and from one research site to the next, is by car. When there is no road 
access to a research site, volunteers will walk from the campsite to the field site. In this case, 
campsites are set up as close to the field site as possible. 
While staying in the campsites, volunteers will sleep in small, shared two-person tents with 
camping beds. Volunteers who prefer not to share a tent are welcome to bring their own.  
Meetings, cooking and eating will be in a separate tent where there will be a gas stove. 
Depending on the research progress, some teams will camp in campsites with hot and cold 
showers and toilets, but others may spend the entire expedition in a campsite without 
showers, freshwater or toilets. In this situation, freshwater will have to be transported for 
several kilometers, and will need to be carefully conserved. Volunteers will help in the 
setup and packing of the camp. 
8.  FOOD 
All meals will be cooked at the campsite. Staff and volunteers will share cooking and clean-up 
duties. The diet consists mainly of rice, potatoes, pasta with meat, fish from cans, eggs or 
vegetables. There will also be salad and fruits. Hot coffee (Nescafe), tea, herbal tea or hot 
chocolate with or without powdered milk, and water are available to drink. Wine, beer, chocolate 
bars, and any special meal or cost for a volunteer’s special request will be the volunteer’s 


 
 
12
responsibility.  If you have favorite snacks or need to supplement your diet with specialty foods, 
please bring what you need, as these items may not be available in Chile. 
Here is a sampling of the foods you might expect in the field. Please bear in mind that variety 
depends on availability. This list is intended to provide a general idea of food types, but it is very 
important that volunteers be flexible.  
Breakfast: 
Bread with jam or cheese, coffee, tea or hot chocolate (Milo)  
Lunch: 
Soup, bread with cheese, coffee, tea, hot chocolate, vegetables 
Dinner: 
Rice with vegetables and meat, fish or egg, any food possible to find in 
cans, pasta with tomatoes, salsa, salad, potatoes, beans, soup, bread with 
cheese, coffee, tea, hot chocolate, an apple or orange  
Snacks/Other: Bread with cheese, cookies, chocolate  
Beverages: 
Boiled water with or without artificial flavor, coffee, powdered milk, tea, 
hot chocolate 
Special Dietary Requirements 
Please alert your Earthwatch Expedition Coordinator to any special dietary requirements as soon 
as possible (e.g., diabetic, lactose intolerant, etc.). Accommodating any special diets is not 
guaranteed and can be very difficult due to availability, location and local conditions. 
Special note to vegans and strict vegetarians: Please be aware that it is often difficult to 
accommodate strict vegetarians and vegans. It may be possible to get meatless meals but vegans 
and strict vegetarians may have a problem avoiding animal products altogether. If this poses a 
problem, then participation on an Earthwatch expedition should be seriously reconsidered. 


 
 
13
TRAVEL PLANNING 
9.   BEFORE YOU LEAVE 
Passport Information 
Most volunteers traveling from outside the host country will require a passport valid for at least 
six months beyond the dates of travel. For a listing of useful websites for passport requirements 
see Section 15 ‘Helpful Resources.’   
Visa Information 
Citizen of the United States, United Kingdom, Australia or Japan do not generally require a 
tourist visa for entry to Chile. Citizens of other countries should check with their travel agent or a 
visa agency for specific visa and entry requirements. For a listing of useful websites for visa 
requirements see Section 15 ‘Helpful Resources.’ 
Essential Information for Volunteers Requiring Visas 
Type of Visa  
You must get a TOURIST VISA.  
Where to Get a Visa 
 
Contact the nearest embassy or consulate of the country to which you 
are traveling to find out how to apply for your visa. Please note that this 
process can take weeks or more. 
 
If you have less than 6 weeks or wish to save yourself trouble, we 
strongly recommend using a visa agency, which can both expedite and 
simplify the process.  See below for a list of visa agencies. 
Required 
Information  
You will need to send your passport (valid for at least 6 months beyond 
your stay), a Visa Application and Immigration Form, 2 to 4 passport-
size photos plus payment to the embassy or visa agency (if applicable).  
 
Please be sure that your passport is valid for at least 6 months beyond 
your stay. 
Cost of a Visa 
 
Generally between US$40-100, but varies from country to country and 
can potentially cost up to US$180. A visa agency will charge an 
additional fee (depending on the amount of time it takes to process the 
application), which you can inquire about directly. 
 
 
 
Visa applicants will also be required to provide proof of their hotel reservation for 
wherever they are staying prior to the rendezvous. 
Reminder: The purpose of your visit is for vacation, holiday, or travel. Foreign immigration 
officials do not always understand the concept of a “working vacation” or even “volunteering.”  
Words such as “working”/”volunteering,” “research” or a “scientific expedition” can raise 
questions concerning the country’s foreign labor laws and/or prompt questions about official 
scientific research permits and credentials, etc., to which volunteers on their own will not be 
equipped to respond. All required research permits for the project are in place and have been 
approved by the proper authorities. 


 
 
14
Visa Agencies 
IN THE UNITED STATES 
PassportVisaExpress.com  
1911 North Fort Myer Drive, Suite 503 
Arlington, VA  22209 
Tel:  +1 888 596-6028, +1 703 351-0992 
Fax:  +1 703 351-0995 
Email:  info@passportvisaexpress.com 
Website:  http://www.passportvisaexpress.com/ 
IN EUROPE 
The Visaservice 
Tel:  +44 (0) 8708 900 185 
Fax:  +44 (0) 20 7278 8464 
Website:  http://www.visaservice.co.uk 
Thames Consular Services Ltd  
Tel:  +44 (0)20 8995 2492 
Fax:  +44 (0)20 8742 1285 
Website:  http://www.visapassport.com 
IN AUSTRALIA 
Ask your travel agency if they can send your visa application on your behalf. 
Volunteers Under 18 Years of Age 
Entry to Foreign Countries 
In an effort to prevent international child abduction many governments have initiated 
procedures at entry/exit points. Many countries require all persons under the age of 18 to have a 
notarized letter from all legal guardians stipulating that the person under 18 can travel 
unaccompanied or in the presence of only one guardian. This letter must give an explanation for 
why only one parent or someone other than a parent is signing the letter. For example, if one 
parent is deceased, only one parent has legal guardianship, or someone other than the parents are 
legal guardians, the letter should state that.  
In addition, airlines may also have documentation requirements for unaccompanied minors. 
Parents of minors are responsible for checking with each airline that their child will be flying to 
ensure that sufficient documentation is provided. This could include a copy of a birth certificate 
or a notarized letter stating that the minor has his or her parent’s permission to travel alone. 
Note: Requirements by specific countries and airlines vary and change frequently. You MUST 
keep informed of the requirements on your own to avoid problems at immigration. If a letter is 
not available, the volunteer under 18 can be refused entry into the country—there is nothing 
Earthwatch Institute can do to help in this circumstance.  
Cancellation Insurance 
We highly recommend trip cancellation insurance, which will help cover your airfare if you are 
unable to travel. Earthwatch does not reimburse airfare or costs associated with cancelled flights. 
Check with your travel agent to find out how to obtain trip cancellation insurance. 


 
 
15
Earthwatch Europe volunteers can purchase Additional Cancellation Cover for £10 as a 
supplement to the main premium that covers non-refundable travel expenses should your team 
be cancelled. 
International Evacuation Insurance 
The travel medical and evacuation insurance, coordinated by ISIS Assistance, is mandatory for all 
Earthwatch volunteers while on an Earthwatch expedition anywhere in the world. The insurance 
covers volunteer travel medical risk, including medical expenses and medical evacuation, while 
traveling with Earthwatch overseas or on an expedition within your home country. ISIS 
Assistance will also facilitate evacuation from the project site in the event of an emergency. 
Without insurance, the costs of such measures can be on the order of US$20,000 to $50,000.   
A detailed description of the Earthwatch Volunteer Travel Medical Insurance Program policy 
will be sent with this briefing. Please note that policies are specific to each Earthwatch office. 
ISIS Assistance also provides a 24-hour emergency hotline for the use of insured persons under 
the Earthwatch program, and can help with medical emergencies, doctor and hospital selection, 
obtaining additional medical options, or medical translation problems. ISIS Assistance is backed 
by International SOS and Global Medical Management, who provide emergency medical 
evacuation and rescue services. The Earthwatch policy certificate number is US 0113. In addition, 
each individual policy is identified by the volunteer’s Earthwatch ID number, shown above your 
name on your team list. 
In an emergency - If you are calling from outside of the US, the number to call is: +44 (20) 8762 
8015. You may call this number collect/reverse charges. 
In an emergency - If you are calling from inside the US, the toll-free number to call is: +1 888 422-
4747. 
Basic coverage is valid in the country of your Earthwatch expedition and during international 
travel to and from your expedition. If the expedition takes place in your home country, coverage 
begins when your group forms for the expedition and ends when the group disbands, and is 
incremental to your existing health insurance. Options are available for volunteers who would 
like to extend the period of coverage, increase insurance amounts or purchase additional 
cancellation or baggage insurance. 
Travel Agencies  
Contact your local travel agent or use the web to find the lowest rates to make your travel 
arrangements. A list of suggested travel agents can be found in, Section 15 ‘Helpful Resources.’ Be 
sure to give your rendezvous details to your travel agent as soon as possible so they can plan 
your trip accordingly. 
Other Advice / Information 
• 
Local Currency:  Chilean pesos. One US dollar is between 560 to 680 Chilean pesos 
• 
Language: Spanish 
 
• 
International Dialing Code: Chile: 56.  Santiago from inside Chile: 02, Santiago for other 
country: +56 2 
• 
Electricity: 220  


 
 
16
• 
Time Zone: GMT -4  
• 
Personal Funds: ATMs are available in practically every city of Chile.  A credit card is 
recommended. ATMs are also available in some gas stations along the road. Money can be 
exchanged at the international airport in Santiago and in malls in Santiago and La Serena. 
10.  HEALTH INFORMATION 
Routine Immunizations  
All volunteers should make sure they have the following up-to-date immunizations required by 
your home country: DPT (diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus), polio, MMR (measles, mumps and 
rubella) and varicella (if you have not already had chicken pox).  
Other standard immunizations common in some countries may include: HIB (haemophilus 
influenza), pnuemococcal, meningococcal, influenza and hepatitis B. 
Project Inoculations     
The following are recommendations only. Health conditions around the world are constantly 
changing, so keep informed and consult your local travel health clinic, the US Center for Disease 
Control (www.cdc.gov) or the World Health Organization (www.who.int) websites. Medical 
decisions are the responsibility of each volunteer. Please consult your physician, your local Public 
Health Department or the resources in Section 15 ‘Helpful Resources’ for the latest health 
information for travelers.  
 
* Cholera may be present in the research area. In 1973 the WHO, recognizing that immunization 
cannot stop the spread of cholera among countries, deleted from the International Health 
Regulations the requirement of cholera immunization as a condition of admission to any country. 
In 1990 the WHO stated that immunization against cholera was not effective and they do not 
recommend it. In 1991 the WHO confirmed that certification was no longer required by any 
country or territory. 
 
Required for Entry 
Recommended for Health Reasons 
Tetanus 
 
X - Up to date 
Typhoid 
 
X 
Yellow Fever 
X - If traveling from 
countries or region where it 
is endemic, a Certificate of 
Vaccination is required 
 
Hepatitis A 
 
X 
Cholera 
* 
 
Hepatitis B 
 
X 
Rabies 
 
X - It is not compulsory, but 
recommended in case of dog bites 
(rabies is endemic in Chile) 
Hanta virus 
** 
 


 
 
17
** Hanta Virus is present at the research sites.  This is a very dangerous respiratory disease 
transmitted by wild mice. It is a disease endemic to all Americas but no vaccines are available yet, 
so we recommend volunteers do not eat wild berries or enter houses or any obscure places that 
have been closed for a long time. The virus is very unstable in daylight and oxygen. 
Tuberculosis (TB): The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that one third of the world’s 
population is infected with the bacterium (M.tuberculosis) that causes tuberculosis (TB). Incidence 
of tuberculosis is higher in developing countries, particularly in Asia, Africa, the Caribbean and 
Latin America. In general, approximately 10% of persons infected with M. tuberculosis are at risk 
for developing active TB during their lifetimes. TB is considered highly treatable with 
medications that are of relatively low toxicity and cost. Volunteers returning from developing 
countries are encouraged to have a (PPD)-tuberculin skin-test to screen for potential infection. 
These recommendations are for this project site only. Please consult your physician for guidance 
on inoculations if you intend to travel to other parts of the country. Inoculation requirements and 
suggestions are subject to change. Be sure to consult a public health organization prior to travel to 
ensure that you have the most current inoculation information. Please see Section 15 ‘Helpful 
Resources’ for a listing of recommended health resources.   
11.  WHAT TO BRING 
PLEASE BRING THIS EXPEDITION BRIEFING WITH YOU! 
General Considerations 
Do not bring more luggage than you can carry and handle on your own. We recommend that you 
pack a carry-on bag with an extra set of field clothing and personal essentials in the event that 
your luggage is lost and/or takes several days to catch up with you. 
Weather Considerations 
Please take into consideration the weather conditions during your team when packing for your 
expedition. Climate information can be found in Section 13 ‘Project Conditions.’ 
Teams I, II, III and IV: Must be prepared for sunny and raining days, cold nights and humid 
conditions. Rubber boots or clothes for walking along bushes and prickle plants are 
recommended. Leather gloves, a torch and a hat are also very useful. 
Team V, VI, VII and VIII: Must be prepared for sunny days, cold nights, and long walks over dry 
and rough terrain. No rain is expected. Small binoculars to watch marine otters are 
recommended. Sunhat, torch, water container, leather gloves and walking boots are compulsory. 
Essential Items 
 
• 
This Expedition Briefing 
• 
A photocopy of your passport, flight itinerary, and credit cards 
 
Required Items   
 
Clothing/Footwear for Fieldwork  
• 
Lightweight, quick drying, long-sleeved shirts and pants/trousers 


 
 
18
• 
Strong leather or walking boots, pants, jacket and hat; these items should not be 
expensive as they are at high risk of being torn on rocks and thorny bushes 
• 
Fleece jacket, pants and/or undergarments   
• 
Shorts - 1-2 pairs for around camp and town 
• 
Shorts and long-sleeved shirts (to protect from sun in the summer and thorns all 
year) 
• 
Bathing suit for swimming and bathing in the sea (optional, but recommended). 
• 
Water sandals (highly recommended) 
• 
Socks (thick to protect your feet) 
• 
Hiking boots with good ankle support (make sure boots are well broken in) 
• 
Leather gloves for warmth and protection against thorns 
• 
Hat with wide brim 
 
Clothing/Footwear for Leisure 
• 
One set of clothing to keep clean for end of expedition  
 
Field Supplies 
• 
Small daypack/rucksack 
• 
Drybag or plastic sealable bags (good for protecting equipment such as camera from 
dust, humidity, and water)  
• 
Insect repellent spray 
• 
Water bottles (minimum 2, 1-liter bottles) 
• 
Water filter or iodine tablets 
 
Bedding and Bathing 
• 
Warm sleeping bag 
• 
Towel (quick-dry travel towel recommended) 
• 
If you do not wish to share a tent with another volunteer, please bring your own 
camping tent 
 
Personal Supplies  
• 
Personal toiletries (we recommend bringing biodegradable soaps and shampoos) 
• 
Roll of toilet paper  
• 
Antibacterial wipes or lotion (good for “washing” hands while in the field) 
• 
Personal first-aid kit (e.g. anti-diarrhea pills, antibiotics, antiseptic, itch-relief, pain 
reliever, bandages, blister covers, etc.) and personal medications 
• 
Sunscreen lotion with SPF 30 or higher 
• 
Lip balm 
• 
Sunglasses. 
• 
Flashlight (torch) or headlamp with spare batteries and bulb 
• 
Binoculars (7x35) 
 
Miscellaneous  
• 
Spending money  
• 
Camera, film, extra camera battery (for photographing marine otters in the wild, 200 - 400 
ASA film is recommended) 
 
Optional/Recommended Items 
 
• 
Earplugs 
• 
Books or games for free time on rainy days. 


 
 
19
12.  RECOMMENDED READING 
Scientific Media 
Medina, G. 1996. Activity budget and social behaviour of Marine otter (Lutra felina) in Southern 
Chile. In: Reuther, C.; Rowe-Rowe, D. (eds). Proceedings VI. International Otter Colloquium, 
Pietermaritzburg 1993. Hankensbüttel. Habitat 11:62-64.  
 
Medina, G. 1996. Conservation and status of Lontra provocax in Chile. Pacific Conservation 
Biology 2: 414-419. 
 
Medina, G. 1996. Feeding habits of Marine otter (Lutra felina) in Southern Chile. In: Reuther, C.; 
Rowe-Rowe, D. (eds). Proceedings VI. International Otter Colloquium, Pietermaritzburg 
1993. Hankensbüttel. Habitat 11:65-68. 
 
Medina-Vogel, G., Bartheld, V.J.L, Alvarez, P.R. and Delgado R.C. (2006). Population assessment 
and habitat use by marine otter (Lontra felina) in southern Chile. Wildlife Biology. Vol. 12, issue 
no. 2. 
 
Medina-Vogel, G.,  Delgado, R.C,  Alvarez,  P.R and Bartheld V.J.L. (2004). Feeding ecology of the 
marine otter (Lontra felina) in a rocky seashore of the South of Chile. Marine Mammal Science. 
Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 134–144. 
 
Ostfeld, R., Ebensperger, L., Klosterman, L. and Castilla, J.C. (1989). Foraging, activity 
budget and social bahaviour of the South American marine otter Lutra felina (Molina 
1782). National Geographic Research 5: 422-438. 
 
Popular Media 
Hans Kruuk (1995). Wild Otters, Predation and Population. Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
ISBN: 0 19 854070 1 
 
Also, any tourist, hiking or camping book for visiting Chile would be helpful and of 
interest. 
 
Many of these media can be purchased online through popular vendors. See Section 15 ‘Helpful 
Resources’ for more information.  
13.  PROJECT CONDITIONS 
Please show this section to your physician when he/she is completing your health statement. Be sure to 
discuss inoculation requirements with your physician well in advance of your departure date. See Section 
10 ‘Health Information’ for inoculation information. 
To the examining physician: 
Your patient has volunteered to join a field research team that has specific physical demands of 
which you and your patient should be aware. We need your accurate evaluation of your 


 
 
20
patient’s ability to meet the conditions detailed below in order to safeguard his/her health and 
safety and ensure that he/she can participate fully and effectively. 
Overview 
Volunteers should be relatively fit as they will be usually walking more than 6 km/3.7 miles a 
day over rough terrain. Sometimes, when volunteers leave the campsite to survey an area several 
kilometers from the camp, they will take their tents and camp near those sites for few days, while 
others carry on with otter trapping and sampling near the main site. Due the proximity of water, 
volunteers must know how to swim. 
 
There are not great hazards, however small falls are likely as volunteers will be walking 
over rocky seashore. It is suggested that volunteers do not pick wild berries and never 
consume wild foods without staff approval. 
 
In case of major emergencies there are very well equipped hospitals in the cities of La 
Serena, Temuco and Concepción, and in small towns along the road located no more than 
two hours by car from every camping site. 
 
The information provided below is as accurate as possible, but please keep in mind that 
conditions may change once in the field and the project could potentially be more or less 
strenuous than the chart indicates. Volunteers will hike or walk up to 6 km/4 mi per section (up 
to three sections may be checked per day). Volunteers will carry one daypack plus equipment 
(<20 lbs/9.1 kg). 
 
Workload/Intensity 
Time (hours per day)/days per team 
Sitting 
 
Surveying teams: 2 hours  
Bending 
 
1-2 hours (not continuous) 
Hiking 
18 km/12 mi 
Surveying teams: 4-8 hours 
Walking 
18 km/12 mi 
From early morning to sundown 
Carrying  
<20 lbs/9.1 kg 
Surveying teams: 6-8 hours 
Swimming 
Optional, only in summer (December – March) 
Medical Conditions of Special Concern 
Most of your time will be spent hiking along seashore and squeezing under or between large 
rocks. Healthy ankles and knees are necessary to be comfortable and you should be agile and 
flexible enough to deal with rocky seashores. You should consider your participation carefully if 
you have any of the following conditions or impairments: any past knee or ankle trauma, any 
condition that limits one’s mobility over slippery surfaces, any condition that requires frequent 
medical attention, inability to sleep on the ground or limited mobility. 
There are no significant health/medical issues. A few mosquitoes (non-malarial) can be expected 
when working along seashores or at night in the camp. Also there are prickly plants that can 
sometimes cause allergic skin reactions, so lightweight long-sleeved pants and shirts are advised. 
Potential Hazards 
Please see Section 10 for inoculation recommendations. Most diseases are prevented with basic 
safety cautions. Please see the CDC (www.cdc.gov) or WHO (www.who.int) websites for more 
information. 
In general, hiking hazards can include unstable hiking surfaces, unprotected overhangs, 
distance/time to full medical attention, risk of sprains/strains/breaks due to falling or missteps, 


 
 
21
risk of exposure to water borne diseases, exposure to dangerous/territorial animals, crossing fast-
moving or deep waterways, encounter with annoying/allergy producing plants, etc. 
The hazards that volunteers may face on the project include falls from rocks, knee or ankle 
trauma and some cuts and scrapes. There is also a very high chance of tearing your clothes on 
barbed wire fences, so please do not bring clothing that are valuable or irreplaceable. Although to 
date we have never had a volunteer bitten by a dog, free ranging or domestic dogs are always a 
potential danger. Make sure you are up to date with your tetanus and rabies shots.   
The field team will always avoid working in most dangerous areas or near houses with free 
ranging dogs. During summer insects are a problem, especially big black and gray flies called 
“tabanos.” Mosquito repellents may work for other insects, but nothing works for “tabanos” – a 
ping-pong racquet may be a good choice against them. Anti-allergic drugs are recommended for 
allergic reactions to their bites.   
General Conditions 
General conditions are difficult to describe. Normally the rainiest months are from June to 
September, with the drier and hotter months between December and March. However, in the 
southern study areas near Concepción it is also possible to experience long periods of rain even 
during these drier months, as well as intense heat.  The northern research areas near La Serena 
are generally hot and dry, being at the southern end of the Atacama Desert.  
Humidity 
69% 
to 
90% 
Temperature Range: 
44°F/7°C 
to 
60°F/16°C 
Altitude 
90 ft/27 m 
to 
800 ft/244 m 
Rainfall 
79 in/ 2000 mm 
per 
year 
Research Site Climate and Terrain  
The southern teams (teams I, II, III and IV) will confront a great variety of landscapes, from dry 
lands to forestry areas. Seashore usually is rocky, steep and difficult to walk along , requiring 
climbing and jumping over stones and rocks. The northern teams (teams V, VI, VII and VIII) will 
confront a desert with absolutely no water or rivers, but great sites to see wildlife. Southern study 
sites are closer to larger towns and cities as well as rivers. At the northern study sites sun and dry 
wind is normal, Site 5 and 6 (see table 1, in The Research section) could have rain or drizzle. At all 
sites nights are cold, with temperatures mainly around 46°F (10°C).  
Sunscreen and sunhats are needed. In southern study sites (Teams I, II, III and IV) vegetation is 
mainly pine forest plantations and natural forest composed of oak (Nothofagus obliqua) and canelo 
(Drimys winteri) and other Nothofagus species trees. Ground is mostly arable land with some thick 
bushes and trees. 
14.  EMERGENCIES IN THE FIELD 
Proximity to Medical Care 
Depending on the study site location, the affected person will be taken to the closest hospital in 
La Serena, Santiago, Concepción or Temuco. Hospitals are very well equipped and prepared for 
any emergency. Study sites are 20 to 160 km from the closest major hospital. In small towns and 
cities there are first-aid centers and small hospitals. 


 
 
22
Staff certified in safety training  
 
Dr. Gonzalo Medina Vogel is certified in CPR 
(Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) and First Aid 
Nearest hospital and/or clinic 
 
La Serena, Santiago, Concepcion or Temuco, depending 
on study site location. A few of the many possible 
hospitals are: 
 
Hospital de La Serena - San Juan de Dios 
Balmaceda Nº 916  
La Serena,  Chile  
Telephone 
56-5-120-0560 
 
Hospital Regional Guillermo Grant 
San Martin N° 1436  
Concepcion,  Chile  
Telephone 
56-4-123-7445 
 
Hospital Regional de Temuco 
Manuel Montt N° 115  
Temuco,  Chile  
Telephone 
56-4-529-6537 
 
Distance 
20 to 160 km, again depending on site 
15.  HELPFUL RESOURCES 
Project-related and Principal Investigator Websites 
• 
IUCN Otter Specialist Group:  http://www.otterspecialistgroup.org/index.php  
• 
Chilean System of Environmental Information (in Spanish): http://www.sinia.cl/portal  
• 
Tourist and road maps of Chile:  http://www.turistel.cl/ 
Useful Visa Information 
• 
General:  http://www.embassyworld.com  
• 
For Japanese citizens:  http://www.rainbowt.jp/travel/visa_top.html  
• 
For Australian citizens:  http://www.travel.com.au 
• 
Passport Visa Express:  http://www.passportvisaexpress.com 
• 
The Visaservice:   http://www.visaservice.co.uk 
• 
Thames Consular Services Ltd:  http://www.visapassport.com 
 


 
 
23
Travel Guidebooks and Booksellers 
• 
Lonely Planet travel guidebooks and online travel site:  http://www.lonelyplanet.com. 
Their guidebooks can be purchased from their website. 
• 
The Rough Guide travel guidebooks and online travel site:  
http://travel.roughguides.com/ 
• 
Amazon:  http://www.amazon.com 
• 
Barnes and Noble:  http://www.bn.com 
• 
Airport Codes Worldwide:  http://www.logisticsworld.com/airports.asp  
Travel and Airline Resources 
• 
TravelNotes.org:  http://www.1800-fly.com 
• 
World Travel Guide:  http://www.worldtravelguide.com 
• 
Cheap Flights (worldwide):  http://www.travelix.com/ or 
http://www.discountair.com/  
• 
Airport Codes Worldwide:  http://www.logisticsworld.com/airports.asp  
• 
Third World Traveler – offers many links for useful travel information:  
http://www.thirdworldtraveler.com/Travel/Travel_Links.html 
• 
STA Travel (US):  http://www.statravel.com 
Tel:  +1 800 781-4040 
• 
STA Travel (UK):  http://www.statravel.co.uk 
Tel:  +44 (0) 1865 792800 
Fax:  +44 (0) 1865 792911 
Email:  manager.oxford@statravel.co.uk  
Quote code:  EWE01/02 
• 
Wexas International (Europe):  http://www.wexas.com  
Tel:  +44 (0) 20 7581 8761 
Fax:  +44 (0) 20 7581 7679 
Email:  southern@wexas.com 
Quote code:  EWE01/02 
• 
UK Foreign Office travel advice:  http://www.fco.gov.uk/travel  
• 
Travel website for Australia:  http://www.smartraveler.gov.au 
• 
Exito Travel (Latin American travel):  http://www.exitotravel.com 
Country Information 
• 
Country Reports - country information from around the world:  
http://www.countryreports.org 
• 
National Geographic Map Machine:  
http://plasma.nationalgeographic.com/mapmachine 


 
 
24
• 
U.S. State Department:  http://www.state.gov/  
• 
World Time Server:  http://www.worldtimeserver.com/ (time worldwide with 
GMT/UTC) or http://worldbuddy.com 
• 
 Currency Converter:  http://www.xe.com/ucc/ 
• 
Telephone dialing from and to anywhere:  http://kropla.com/dialcode.htm 
• 
Online Unit Conversions:  http://www.onlineconversion.com 
• 
Worldwide Weather:  http://www.worldweather.com or 
http://www.wunderground.com  
• 
ATM Locator: 
http://visa.via.infonow.net/locator/global/jsp/SearchPage.jsp 
http://www.mastercard.com/atmlocator/index.jsp 
• 
Heat Index (temperature, dewpoint and relative humidity): 
http://www.weatherimages.org/data/heatindex.html 
• 
Exhaustive List of Weather Resources:  
http://cirrus.sprl.umich.edu/wxnet/servers.html 
Health Information 
• 
US Travel Clinic Directory: http://www.astmh.org/scripts/clinindex.asp 
• 
Link to Travel Health Insurance providers:  http://www.travelhealth.com 
• 
Travel Health website: http://www.mdtravelhealth.com is a resource for healthy travel 
that covers country-specific risks and diseases, suggested immunizations,  health 
recommendations, and locating a travel clinic near you.   
• 
Center for Disease Control:  http://www.cdc.gov  
Tel:  +1 800 311-3435 or +1 888 232-3228 
• 
World Health Organization:  http://www.who.int 
• 
The Travel Doctor (Australia):  http://www.tmvc.com.au 
Tel:  +1 300 658-844 (within AU) 
• 
Disease Outbreaks: http://www.who.int/csr/don/en/  
• 
Hospital for Tropical Diseases Healthline (UK) 
Tel:  0906 1 337733 (within UK) 
(calls are charged at 50p per minute) 
• 
MASTA Travelers’ Healthline (UK) 
Tel:  0906 8 224100 (within UK) 


 
 
25
THE RESEARCH 
16.  BACKGROUND, OBJECTIVES AND METHODS 
Background 
 
There are 13 otter species in the world. Four of them are found in South America: the giant otter 
(Pteronura brasiliensis), the neotropical otter (Lontra longicaudis), the southern river otter (Lontra 
provocax) and the marine otter (Lontra felina) (Chehébar 1990). All four species are considered 
endangered (Chehébar 1990), and their survival is affected by habitat degradation and 
disturbance, poaching, vegetation removal, accidental death and pollution (Chehébar 1990, 
Medina 1996). This project will work with two of these four species: the marine otter and the 
southern river otter.  
 
Marine Otter 
The marine otter lives along exposed rocky seashores of the Pacific from 6°S near Chimbote 
(Perú) to 56°S near Cape Horn and Isla de los Estados in Chile and Argentina (Castilla and 
Bahamondes 1979, Olrog and Lucero 1981, Ostfeld et al. 1989). It is a small animal (3.2-5.8 kg), the 
most distinct species from its genus (van Zyll de Jong 1972) and the only one exclusively marine 
(Ostfeld et al. 1989, Estes 1989). All activities carried out by marine otters are confined to an area 
not wider than 30 m inland and 150 m offshore (Castilla and Bahamondes 1979). Most of the 
species’ territorial activities, such as grooming and social behavior, take place out of the water 
(Ostfeld et al. 1998). The huge increase in human population and human-related activities in the 
past decades, mainly in northern and central Chile, may be responsible for the demise of several 
marine otter populations and for the isolation of many others (Cabello 1979, Melquist 1984, 
Ostfeld et al. 1989). The species is listed as Endangered by the IUCN (International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature), and Vulnerable by the Red Book for Terrestrial Vertebrates in Chile 
(Glade 1993).   
 
Southern River Otter 
Between 100 and 150 years ago, the southern river otter exhibited an extensive latitudinal 
distribution from the Cauquenes and Cachapoal Rivers (34°S) to the Magellan region (53°S) in 
Chile, using rivers and streams from the sea to the Andes (Osgood 1943, Medina 1996).  Now, 
populations in freshwater habitats have been confirmed in only seven isolated areas from Cautín 
(39°S) to Futaleufú (43ºS), and it has been suggested that the major factors leading to the southern 
river otter decline is habitat degradation (Melquist 1984, Medina 1996). The southern river otter is 
listed in the Chilean Red Data Book of Vertebrates as in danger of extinction (Glade 1987). It is 
also listed as Endangered in the Argentine National Wildlife List (Chehébar et al. 1986), and listed 
as “In Danger” by the IUCN Red list of Threatened Species (Hilton-Taylor 2000). 
Medina-Vogel et al. (2003) found that southern river otters more often mark and visit shelters in 
rivers, streams and shorelines with a high density of riparian vegetation, large woody debris, 
above ground roots, shallow channels and little human activity, and especially in rivers and 
streams with temperate evergreen ombrophilous swamp forests (Ramirez et al. 1983). All 
previous dietary studies of southern river otters in freshwater habitats have shown a relatively 
high frequency (72-79%) of crustacean consumption (Chehébar et al. 1986, Medina 1997, 1998). 
Previous studies (Chehébar et al. 1986, Medina 1991, 1996, 1997) also demonstrate the association 


 
 
26
of the southern river otter with high densities of riparian vegetation, shallow river and stream 
channels with floodplains, and aquatic environments with above-ground roots, woody debris 
and abundant small to medium-sized stones or gravel. Therefore, river and stream canalization 
or extensive riparian vegetation removal appears to result in significant impact on the southern 
river otter (Medina-Vogel et al. 2003). 
The Problem 
Generally, the geographic ranges of species are limited because individual animals are incapable 
of moving through or around major barriers. Oceans, deserts, mountains and rivers are natural 
barriers to migration. Geographic isolation is one of the most important factors leading to 
speciation. Highly isolated biotopes (i.e., islands, or places like Chile which is located between 
the Pacific in the west and the Andes in the east), favored the evolution of several unique, and so-
called endemic species.  
 
Humans have heavily impacted the Chilean region, changing the biotope and destroying the 
ecological balance. This has had a deep impact on flora and fauna (Primak 1995). Natural habitats 
that were historically connected are now split into ‘islands’ due to anthropogenic influences, and 
surrounded by unsuitable habitat. Because of increased habitat fragmentation, the average 
habitat fragment size decreases and this leads to an increase in the average distance between the 
fragmented habitats. This makes it impossible for many animals to cross over the 
anthropogenically altered areas (Matthysen and Currie 1996, Dias et al. 2000). Animal and plant 
species cannot adapt evolutionarily to this fast change, and fragmentation can potentially bring 
local population size to the brink of extinction (Gaines et al. 1997). Numerous cases where 
endemic species were affected by foreign invasive species (eaten or otherwise suppressed) have 
already been documented (Wauters et al. 2000). Likewise, through hunting, predator-prey 
balance can be altered so seriously that only breeding and re-naturalizing programs can 
counteract it (Tudge 1993, Magin et al. 1994). Introduction of alien species, deforestation and 
hunting are only some examples of adverse effects on local species of plants and animals. 
Interference of any kind, through selective pressure, could lead to a decrease in the native animal 
community diversity (Primack 1995) and at worst it could cause populations to become extinct. 
Studies dealing with habitat fragmentation have been generally conducted at a level of 
communities, using the concept of islands biogeography (MacArthur and Wilson 1967). Recently, 
by applying the theory of metapopulation (Gilpin and Hanski 1991, Hanski and Gilpin 1997) 
studies have been assessing the process of colonization and extinction at the species level. In the 
case of mustelids, the majority of these studies have been of species associated to forests and 
rarely of aquatic species (Verboom and Van Apeldoorn 1990, Thompson and Arrest 1994, 
McCullough 1996, Hargis et al. 1999). For this reason, the proposed study is unique, in that it 
deals with two mainly aquatic species. 
 
Demographic studies such as capture-recapture or radio tracking have been used to estimate 
dispersal; however, these direct methods have been unable to accurately assess individual 
movements and distribution following dispersal (Peacok and Ray 2001). Recently, genetic 
approaches to estimate dispersal rates have been widely used. Thus, several studies attempted to 
improve the interpretation of dispersal pattern by supporting demographic and spatial ecology 
studies with genetic studies, as a population of organisms is almost always subdivided 
geographically and/or changes demographically in time (Satta and Takahata 2004). Two models 
of dispersal have been proposed. The metapopulation model views local populations, which 
form the metapopulation, as discrete (or relatively discrete) entities in space, interacting via 
migration and gene flow (Hanski and Gaggiotti 2004). The linear stepping-stone model (Kimura 
and Weiss 1964) states that gene flow should only occur between adjacent populations and the 
two populations at the opposite ends of a linear distribution should be the most differentiated.  


 
 
27
The proposed study will test these two models by applying them to the marine and southern 
river otter populations along the Pacific coast of Chile. The study will make use of molecular 
genetics using two different markers (i.e., the control region of mitochondrial DNA and the 
microsatellite loci) to assess if marine otter population distribution and gene flow is coincident to 
the description of the stepping-stone model, and if the southern river otter population conforms 
to the metapopulation model.   
 
The patchy distribution of marine otters may be following the distribution of rocky costal patches 
separated by long sandy beaches and human settlements north of Chiloe Island (43oS) and sea 
channels between the islands in the archipelago south of Chiloe. But why would sandy beaches 
and sea channels between islands be barriers for the marine otter? There are two otters species 
(Enhydra lutris and Lontra felina) exclusively adapted to marine life (Estes 1989). E. lutris needs to 
feed frequently and abundantly to keep its body heat in the cold waters of the Pacific Ocean from 
the Northern hemisphere and the Bering sea. To live in this cold environment, E. lutris evolved a 
high metabolism (Bowen et al. 2002), and the most dense and waterproof fur compared to other 
mammals, spending at least 12% of its time per day in grooming activities to maintain the 
waterproof and the isolating properties of its fur (Williams and Worthy 2002). Different is the 
case of the marine otter, which is the smallest of its genus and the most recent mammal adapted 
to a marine environment (Ostfeld et al. 1989, Estes 1989). Contrary to E. lutris, the marine otter 
might compensate for heat loss imposed by its cold environment by not only increasing heat 
production but also by spending less time in the water and making trips into the sea mainly to 
feed (Ostfeld et al. 1989, Medina-Vogel et al. 2004). Because of heat loss, this species could not 
spend long periods crossing sea channels or large estuaries between sections of rocky seashore. 
Their ability to cross by land using long stretches of sandy beach has decreased due to the 
increased use of them by men and wandering dogs, and could now be hostile environments to 
marine otters in some regions. Because of human-related restrictions in the use of these long 
stretches of beach to cross into other areas, the structure and distribution of marine otter 
populations may be changing and the new distribution map may be explained by the linear 
stepping-stone model where one should find a restricted gene flow between closest populations 
on the north and south coast of Chile (Kimura and Weiss 1964, Krankham et al. 2002, Satta and 
Takahata 2004). In the case of populations divided by stretches that are too long to cross or 
divided by complete barriers, the gene flow may be null. However, there is no information about 
the effect of patchy rocky littoral habitat on marine otter populations, and about the dispersal 
pattern and gene flow between such populations. The association of marine otters with a linear 
coastal line and rocky seashores provides a unique situation to test the stepping-stone model 
hypothesis.  
 
In the case of southern river otters, the association of their last existing populations to habitats 
along different river basins provides us with the opportunity to test the metapopulation dispersal 
model where a subpopulation will be distributed within river basins. If the metapopulation 
model proves to be appropriate for southern river otter populations in Chile, lessons from this 
model could be applied to southern river otter conservation efforts by ensuring the maintenance 
of connecting corridors between river basins, a major task considering the use of the landscape 
between river basins in southern Chile. 
 
Otters of many species defend their territory, and young animals migrate to a different area to 
mark new territory. Otters and other mustelids species have sex-biased dispersal, where males 
have bigger home ranges and migrate farther distances than females (Gerell 1970, Erlinge 1974, 
1977, King 1975, Simms 1979, Hornocker et al. 1983, Debrot and Mermod 1983, Griffith and 
Fendley 1989, Erlinge and Sandell 1986, Sandell 1989, Brzezinski et al. 1992, Jedrzejewski et al. 
1995, Kruuk 1995, Lodé 1996). Dr. Gonzalo Medina-Vogel, with his team of undergraduate and 
graduate students, has been studying the southern river otter in southern Chile using radio-
tracking for four years. They recorded intrasexual territoriality for this species and bigger 


 
 
28
dispersal and home range for males (G. Medina pers. com). Blundell et al. (2002) using 
microsatellites loci and radio tracking in North American river otters (Lontra Canadensis) 
observed that males are more capable of dispersing and recolonizing new areas than females. 
Similar observations have been recorded for Lutra lutra in marine environments along the coast of 
Shetland, where male otters had larger home ranges than females (Kruuk and Moorhouse 1991). 
In Idaho, USA, Melquist and Hornocker (1983) also recorded larger home ranges and dispersal 
patterns in male North American river otters than in females tagged with implanted radio 
transmitters. However, no population or phylogeographic studies have been conducted 
involving the marine otter and southern river otter. Most of the population studies involving 
genetic analysis involve European species, such as Lutra lutra (Dallas et al. 2003, Dallas et al. 2002, 
Pertoldi et al. 2001, Cassens et al. 2000, Dallas et al. 2000, Dallas et al. 1999, Effenberger 1999, Dallas 
and Piertney 1998) or North American river otters, Lontra canadensis (Blundell et al. 2002) and sea 
otters, Enhydra lutris (Larson et al. 2002a, Larson et al. 2002b, Cronin et al. 1996, Bodkin et al. 1999, 
Lidicker and McCollum 1997). The first study on the European otter (Lutra lutra) characterized 
microsatellites (Dallas and Piertney 1998) and analyzed mitochondrial DNA using RFLP 
(Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms) (Effenberger 1999). Studies with E. lutris were 
done using microsatellite and mitochondrial DNA control region analysis (Larson et al. 2002). The 
results from microsatellite studies showed a great reduction of the genetic diversity in samples 
analyzed before the great population decrease in the XVIII and XIV centuries, while later, the 
mtDNA does not show differentiation (Larson et al. 2002a). The authors suggested that the 
negative effects of reduced genetic diversity and the consequences of inbreeding depression on 
the species should be monitored. Recently, studies have compared the estimated genetic 
composition and sex ratio using L. lutra feces and carcasses from which microsatellites and SRY 
genes were isolated (Dallas et al. 2003). These projects are part of a discipline called 
”Conservation Genetics,” which is the application of genetics to preserve species as dynamic 
entities capable of coping with environmental change (Frankham 2002). Conservation genetics 
can be used to provide guidelines to minimize extinctions, inbreeding and loss of genetic 
diversity, to identify populations of concern, to resolve population structure and taxonomic 
uncertainties, to define management units within species, to detect hybridization, to define 
geographic sites for reintroduction, to choose the best populations for reintroduction and to 
understand species biology (Frankham 2002). 
 
On this project we will capture marine otters from six sites on the Chilean coast between 25ºS and 
39ºS latitude, and southern river otters from several different river basins and micro-basins 
between 39ºS and 43ºS latitude, to collect samples to study polymorphism through microsatellite 
loci to estimate dispersal. The genetic data will be important to assess population structure, gene 
flow and genetic diversity. We will select microsatellites loci developed previously for L. lutra by 
Dallas and Piertney (1998) in a total of 13 microssatellites, nine microssatelites studied for mink 
(Mustela vison) (O’Connell et al. 1996), 14 microsatellites for mink and ermine (Mustela erminea) 
(Flemining et al. 1999), one developed for E. lutris (Larson et al. 2002) and, more recently, 10 
microsatellites devolped for L. canadensis. Among the species mentioned, the last is the most 
closely related to marine otters (Beheler et al. 2004).  
 
Microsatellites or simple sequences repeat (SSRs) are tandem repeats of 1-6 bases found in 
procariots and eucariots’ genomes (Zane 2002). They are present in coding and non-coding 
regions and are normally characterized by a high degree of polymorphism (Zane 2002). Mutation 
rate is around 10-6 a 10-2, significantly higher than the base substitution rate (Schlötterer and 
Zangerl 1999). The allele variability in microsatellite loci is sufficiently high to solve genetics 
relationships between populations that are closely related, such as paternity and reproductive 
success, breeding behavior, inbreeding levels, evolution studies, fingerprint, population size, 
gene flow and forensic analysis (Morin et al. 1994, Edwards et al. 1992). 
 


 
 
29
Recent works recommend the use of mitochondrial and nuclear markers (Ballard and Whitlock 
2004, Avise 2000). On this project, we will also sequence the mitochondrial DNA control region to 
estimate the female gene flow between populations. The mammalian mitochondrial genome 
consists of a circular, double-stranded DNA molecular that is 15000-17000 base pairs in length, 
about 1/10000 of the smallest animal nuclear genome (Ballard and Whitlock 2004). While the 
genes of nuclear autossomic DNA (nDNA) are restricted to nucleo, limited at two copies per cell, 
and transmitted equally through the parents according to the Mendel’s law, the mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) are distributed on the cytoplasm, present in hundreds to thousands of copies per 
cell, and transmitted exclusively through the maternal lineage (Wallace 1994). The high number 
of copies of mitochondrias per cell makes possible the study of mitochondrial DNA isolated from 
bone samples, each normally its obtain low DNA amount and low quality. This will make it 
possible to increase the sampling of the marine otter from many localities along its distribution 
obtained from museums, universities and many other institutes. We will also collect date such as 
morphometry, weight, age class (juvenile, adult, elder) and sex, which are very important to 
characterize the populations. Data such as morphometry and weight will be used to detect the 
pattern along the marine otter distribution and than correlate with the genetic analysis. Sex and 
age class are indicatives of the population health. A high and abnormal ratio males/female or a 
high number of senescence individuals rather than juvenile can be indicative of a low or negative 
population growth. 
 
Studies of dispersal, including molecular genetics and radio-tracking methodology in other otters 
and mustelids show that males have larger home ranges than females and also they move more 
and farther distances (Gerell 1970, Erlinge 1974, 1977, King 1975, Simms 1979, Hornocker et al. 
1983, Debrot & Mermod 1983, Griffith & Fendley 1989, Erlinge & Sandell 1986, Sandell 1989, 
Brzezinski et al. 1992, Jedrzejewski et al. 1995, Kruuk 1995, Lodé 1996, Blundell et al. 2002). In this 
scenario this study predicts that either marine otter and southern river otter follow the 
intrasexual territorial model where individuals of different sexes overlap their home ranges but 
prevent other individuals of the same sex to come close to their core areas (Powell 1979).  And 
therefore this study also predicts that male otters would migrate more than females, but a 
restricted distance because of human made barriers. Based on this hypothesis the mtDNA, 
maternal lineage, will show populations more structured than seen on the microsatellite data. 
The microsatellite data will show results reflect of paternal and maternal lineage, where we will 
see a population less structured with intermediate gene flow.  
 
Hypothesis 
Previous research confirms that the larger populations of marine otter are only found along 
extended rocky shores in southern Chile, the southwest coast of Chiloé island and the largest 
islands of the southern Chilean archipelagos. Conversely, in the northern, central and southern 
Chile populations are small and more patchily distributed following the patchy natural 
distribution of rocky shores between extended sandy beaches (Ostfeld et al. 1989, Cabello 1978, 
Ebensperger and Castilla 1991, Medina 1996a,b). 
 
Therefore, we predict that: 
• 
long sandy beaches permanently used by humans are becoming barriers for the dispersal of 
marine otters, and this is more evident when patches of rocky shores are separated by long 
sections of sandy beaches permanently used by humans.  
 
Based on these observations we predict that: 
• 
marine otter populations’ distribution along the straight coast of Chile will be explained by 
the stepping-stone model.  
 
The distribution of the southern river otter has declined in freshwater habitats to less than 10% of 
its former distribution. Now populations have a patchy distribution using different transversal 


 
 
30
(East to West) river basins.  Within these river basins otters use more lowland areas and micro-
basins (Medina 1996, Medina 1997). Furthermore, it has been observed that tagged otters can 
disperse from one to another river micro-basin. However, there is no data about dispersal 
between transversal river basins.  
 
Therefore, we hypothesize that: 
• 
the southern river otter natural population structure at a regional scale follows the 
predictions of the metapopulation model where subpopulations are distributed following 
transversal river basins.  
 
However, this population structure is becoming threatened by the extirpation of the otter 
population from transversal rivers basins due to poaching in the past and habitat destruction in 
the present (Medina 1996, Medina-Vogel et al. 2003) and by high human use of the landscapes 
between transversal river basins.    
 
Therefore, we predict that: 
• 
if the distance between southern river otter populations from different transversal river 
basins is too big, gene flow may be null.  
 
Objectives 
The main objective of this project is to evaluate the phylogeographic patterns including dispersal 
and population structure of marine otters in three selected study regions along the Chilean 
seashore, and southern river otters along transversal river basins. 
 
The following are the project’s specific objectives: 
1. To capture marine and southern river otter to collect tissue, blood and bone samples for 
genetics analysis. 
2. To collect feces samples for genetics analysis. 
3. To evaluate the polymorphism among the different mitocondrial DNA control region 
sequences from all tissue, blood and bone samples collected. 
4. To identify and select the polymorphic microsatellite loci for both otter species and 
genotype from all the samples, including feces. 
5. To identify population structure, genetic diversity and gene flow between populations 
using the mtDNA sequences and microsatellite loci.  
6. To use mitochondrial DNA haplotypes and microsatellites alleles identified along its 
distribution to understand patterns of dispersal of otters along their actual distribution 
and the sex-biased dispersion. 
7. To estimate the effective population (or populations) size (Ne) using different methods 
for molecular data. 
8. To calibrate the molecular clock and to calculate the time of the divergence of the species 
and clusters if there is different lineages. 
9. To characterize the populations according to age and gender. 
10. To characterize the variation of the external morphometry and coloration pattern of 
captured marine otters. 
 
Methods 
Study Area 
We will sample marine otter populations in six study sites, all between 25ºS and 43ºS latitude 
(Table 1 and Figure 1). The study regions were chosen according to a gradient scale, where study 
sites or patches of rocky shores will be separated according to distance (> 3 km, >6 km, > 9 km). 


 
 
31
Samples of southern river otter population will be collected in three south regions: (x) north, (y) 
central and (z) south (Figure 1).  
Otter Capture 
Victor soft catch traps® will be setup to trap the maximum number of otters during each field 
trip (Blundell et al. 1999, Gonzalo Medina Vogel pers. obs.). Traps will be checked every four 
hours (marine otters) and twelve hours (southern river otter) for a continuous 24 hour period.  
Traps will be located at the entrances of dens or resting places regularly used by otters.  Each 
trapped otter will be immobilized by an intramuscular injection of 5 mg/kg of Ketamine 
(Ketostop®), and 0.05 mg/kg. Medetomidine (Domitor®), and revived with 0.25 mg/kg of 
Atipamezole (Antisedan®) (Fernandez-Moran et al. 2001, Fernandez-Moran et al. 2002, Soto 
2004). The anesthesia will facilitate the sampling procedure, and will minimize the amount of 
stress experienced by the animals.  Each trapped otter will be clinically examined and its 
physiological parameters monitored during the captive period (Ramsden et al. 1976, Serfass et al. 
1996, Blundell et al. 1999, Soto 2004). All animal captures will be conducted following the 
appropriate protocols and according to an annually renewed permit granted by the Chilean 
Fishery Bureau (Subsecretaría de Pesca). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Geographic localization of study sites in Chile and South America 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
y 
z 
Chile 
Peru 
x 
Marine otter study area 
Southern river otter study area 


 
 
32
Table 1: Characteristics of the six study sites selected to survey marine otter populations.  Information 
obtained by Project DI 01-04 of the Research Vice-chancellor Bureau of the Universidad Andrés Bello.   
Site 
# 
Geographic  
Localization 
Percentage of 
rocky shores 
Number 
of rocky 
patches 
Size of rocky 
patches (km) 
Distance to the closer 
rocky patch of more 
then 20 km long (km) 
Number of 
human 
settlements 
Total 
human 
population 
Punta 
Cachos 
1 
28º3’30’’S 
71º9’W 
93% 
3 
8 – 63.8 
4.1 – 36.8 
3 
3,500 
Totoralillo 
2 
32º20’30’’ 
71º25’W 
73% 
6 
4.6 – 25.3 
5.4 - > 200 
13 
33,300 
Punta 
Gallo 
3 
33º34’S 
71º37’W 
55% 
5 
2.3 – 20.7 
32.2 – 115 
14 
84,750 
Carranza 
4 
35º58’S 
72º47’W 
31% 
4 
2.3 – 18.4 
59.8 – 101.2 
9 
14,250 
Bío Bío 
5 
37º13’30’’S 
73º17’30’’W 
43% 
4 
4.6 – 23 
23 – 96.6 
5 
88,500 
Caleta 
Tirúa 
6 
38º47’S 
73º24’W 
16% 
2 
2.3 – 13.8 
92 – 142.6 
5 
7,500 
Note: Sites 1, 2 and 3 will be controlled by Teams V,VI, VII and VIII.  Sites 4, 5 and 6 by Teams I, 
II, III and IV. 
Blood and Tissue Sampling  
In each of the three study regions otters will be captured for blood sampling.  Blood will be 
preserved in vials containing lysis solution (10mM NaCl, 100mM EDTA, 100mM Tris pH8 e 1% 
w/v SDS) for molecular analysis. Tissues collected from carcasses will be preserved in SED 
solution (NaCl saturado, 250mM EDTA pH 7,5 e 20%v/v DMSO) or alcohol 70%. 
 
DNA Extraction 
We will extract genomic DNA from either blood or tissue, preserved in SED buffer or alcohol, 
according to the phenol-chlorophorm techiniques (Sambrook et al., 2001). Samples with low 
quantities of genomic DNA can be re-extracted using the DNeasy tissue kit (Qiagen Inc.). DNA 
quality will be visualized by electrophoresis in 0.8% agarose gels. The Bone’s DNA extraction will 
proceed using the modified protocol from Tuross (1994), and other protocols will be tested and 
adjusted for use in this species. 
 
Mitochondrial DNA Control Region Study 
Following DNA extraction, the control region will be amplified using the mammal universal 
primers L15926 (5’-TCAAAGCTTACACCAGTCTTGTAAAACC-3’) and H16498 (5’-
CCTGAAGTAGGAACCAGATG-3’) for the PCR reaction. The amplification program will 
execute 35 cycles beginning with denaturation at 94°C for 5 min, annealing 50°C for 45 sec, 
extension 72°C for 1 min, again denaturation for 45 sec, with final extension at 72°C for 10 min. 


 
 
33
However, the annealing temperature will be better adjusted to the species sequence using the 
gradient annealing temperature for the PCR reaction. New primers will also be tested. 
Once the PCR products are optimized, they will be purified according to the protocols of 
commercial kits (e.g. QiaGen), and sequencing reactions will be conducted through cycle 
sequencing (Murray 1989) using either flanking or internal/walking ad-hoc primers labeled with 
the Perkin Elmer Big Dye Terminator kit. Sequencing reactions will be analyzed in an ABI Prism 
3100 automated DNA sequencer. Each individual will be sequenced at least twice (forward and 
reverse) to assure sequence quality. 
 
Microsatellite Loci Study 
We will use approximately 5 microsatellite loci selected from those previously published for 
mustelids. Thirteen microsatellites loci have previously been developed for Lutra lutra by Dallas 
and Piertney (1998), 9 have been designed for M. vison (O’Connell et al. 1996), 14 for M. vison and 
M. erminea (Fleming et al. 1999), two for E. lutris (Larson et al. 2002) and 10 for Lontra canadensis.  
We will choose the most polymorphic microsatellites developed by Dallas and Piertney (1998) 
and tested for the North American river otter, including the five tetranucleotides, which facilitate 
the distinction between homo and heterozygotes, and the 10 microsatellite loci developed for 
Lontra canadensis. We can also use two additional unpublished microsatellite loci 
(tetranucleotides), tested for Lontra canadensis. These microsatellites were developed by Dr. John 
Dallas and the information was sent to us in a personal communication. After DNA extraction, 
around 10 marine otter samples will be amplified by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) to test 
approximately five pre-selected microsatellite loci to determine whether they are monomorphic 
or polymorphic. Once selected and tested, all samples will be submitted to the PCR for 
microsatellite amplification using primers designed for the flanking regions. Annealing 
temperatures will be adjusted along a temperature gradient. 
 
Amplified samples will be submitted to electrophoresis in 6% acrylimyde gel, and the allele size 
and homozygotisity and heterozygotisity determined. The latter results will be confirmed by the 
genotyping of all samples in the automatic sequencing machine, and later analyzed, observing 
fragment size, number of alleles per locus, observed frequency and heterozygosity. 
 
In the case of the microsatellites loci that do not work, obtain bad results or avoid null alleles, the 
fragments will be sequenced for L. felina and new primers will be designed for the flanking 
region. 
 
MtDNA Control Region and Microsatellite Loci Analysis 
The sequences will be aligned using the Clustal X program (version 1.81) (Thompson et al. 1994, 
1997) and the polymorphic nucleotides and haplotypes will be determined visually. Population 
parameters such as nucleotide diversity (π), haplotype diversity (h), and number of substitutions 
(DA) will be calculated using the programs DNAsp (Rozas et al. 2003) and Arlequin ver. 2.000 
(Schneider et al. 2000). Population structure will measured as FST and ΦST using the Tamura-Nei 
model (1993), with α=0.5 recommended for the mtDNA control region and calculating the 
number of females migrants per generation (Nmf). The relationship between haplotypes will be 
inferred through the Median Joining Network using Network program (Bandelt et al. 1992), 
Neighbor Joining tree using the Mega 2.1 program (Molecular Evolutionary Genetic Analysis, 
Kumar et al. 1993) and maximum likelihood trees using the PAUP program (Phylogenetic 
Analysis Using Parsimony, version 4.0 implemented by David L. Swofford), and the best 
nucleotide substitution model will be chosen using the model test. For the reconstructed trees 
will also use L. longicaudis and L. provocax to infer the relationship between the three Lontra 
species. By calibrating the molecular clock from fossil records it will be possible to determine the 
time of divergence of the three species and the possible different clusters of L. felina. 


 
 
34
 
For microsatellite loci the variability of each marine otter population will be measured in terms of 
percentage of polymorphic loci, average expected heterozygosity, average number of alleles per 
locus, percentage of unique alleles, average and maximum range of microsatellite repeats, and 
average variance of microsatellite repeats. We will also measure population structure calculating 
FST and RST (Slatkin 1995) for males and females, and inferring different models of mutation, such 
as the stepwise mutation model (SMM). Indirect estimates of gene flow will be calculated using 
Slatkin’s private allele method (Slatkin 1985) and Wright’s estimate of number of migrants (Nm) 
(Wright 1993). Each identified population will be tested for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and 
linkage equilibrium. All population assessments will be calculated using the program Arlequin 
ver. 2.000 (Schneider et al. 2000) and GENEPOP (Raymond and Rousset, 1995). As with the 
mitochondrial DNA, Neighbor Joining phylogenetic trees also will be constructed for 
microsatellite loci.  
17.  RESULTS AND OPPORTUNITIES 
Research done on both species has already shown that these species are declining, and that 
habitat destruction is their major threat.  However, it is time now to show a regional approach to 
conserve these species.  This project will create information to support the presentation of 
conservation and management perspectives that will include the landscape between those areas 
used by the otters in a habitat protection network. 
 
This new project is intended to use data from otters to identify a habitat network to support 
conservation measures at a regional scale, including the patterns of dispersion and the current 
distribution of subpopulations of otters.   
 
During the next three years, this expedition project will produce a huge step in otter 
conservation.  Each of the species of research have their own problems and difficulties, never the 
less, during the last years we have been able to complete four years of radio-tracking southern 
river otters, one year of radio-tracking marine otters, four years of surveys and a total of ten 
degree dissertations, one PhD dissertation, and modify Chilean policy about otters and their 
importance in river management. 
  
During the next three years we will invite NGOs to become partners in research and conservation 
of otters in Chile and their ecosystem. 
18. LITERATURE CITED 
Andrén, H. 1994. Effects of habitat fragmentation on birds and mammals in landscapes with 
different proportions of suitable habitat: a review.  Oikos 71:355 – 366. 
Alldredge, J. R. and Ratti, J. T. 1986. Comparison of some statistical techniques for analysis of 
resource selection. Journal of Wildlife Management 50: 157-165. 
Avise, J.C. 2000. Phylogeography: the history and formation of species. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 
Ballard, J. W. O. and Whitlock, M. C. 2004. The incomplete natural history of mitochondria. 
Molecular Ecology 13: 729-744. 


 
 
35
Bagenal, T. 1978.  Methods for assessment of fish production in freshwater. Handbook  No. 3. 
International Biological Program.  Third ed. Blackwell Scientific Publications Ltd., Oxford.  
Bandelt, H. J. and Dress, A. W. A. 1992. Split Decomposition: A new and useful approach to 
phylogenetic analysis of distance data. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 1: 242-252. 
Bartheld, J. L.  2001. Patrones de actividad diaria y estacional del chungungo Lontra felina (Molina 
1782) en ambientes rocosos del litoral valdiviano.  Tesis de Grado presentada como parte de 
los requisitos para optar al título de Biólogo Marino.  Universidad Austral de Chile, Facultad 
de Ciencias, Escuela de Biología Marina. 
Blundell, G. M.; Kern, J. W.; Bowyer, R. T. and Duffy, L. K. 1999.  Capturing river otters: a 
comparison of Hancock and leg-hold traps.  Wildlife Society Bulletin  27: 184-192. 
Blundell, G. M.; Ben-David, M.; Groves, P.; Bowyers, R.T. and Geffen, E. 2002. Characteristics of 
sex-biased dispersal and gene flow in coastal river otters: implications for natural 
recolonization of extirpated populations. Molecular Ecology 11: 289-303. 
Bowen, W.D.; Read A.J. and Estes J. 2002.  Feeding Ecology. Pages  217-246 in A. R. Hoelzel, (ed). 
Marine Mammal Biology.  An Evolutionary Approach.  Blackwell Science.  Oxford. 
Brezezinski, M.; Jedrzejewski, W. and Jedrzejewska, B. 1992. Winter home range and movements 
of polecats Mustela putorius in Bialowieza Primeval Forest, Poland.  Acta Theriologica 38: 436-
446. 
Cabello C. 1979. La nutria de mar en la Isla de Chiloé. Boletín Técnico CONAF, No 6. 
Cassens, I.; Tidermann R.; Suchentrunk, F. and Hartl, G. B. 2000. Mitochondrial DNA variation in 
the European otter (Lutra lutra) and the use of spatial autocorrelation analysis in 
conservation. Journal of Heredity 91: 31-35 
Castilla, J.C. and Bahamondes, I. 1979. Observaciones conductuales y ecológicas sobre Lutra felina 
(Molina) 1782 (Carnívora: Mustelidae) en las zonas central y centro-norte de Chile. Archivos 
de Biología y Medicina Experimental, Santiago 12:119-132. 
Chehébar, C. 1990. Action Plan for the Latin American Otters. In: Foster-Turley, P., Macdonald, 
S.M., Mason, C.F. (eds.). Otters. An Action Plan for their Conservation. IUCN, Gland.  
Clobert, J.; Danchin, E.; Dhondt, A. A. and Nichols J. D. (eds). 2001. Dispersal. Oxford University 
Press, New York.  
Cronin, M. A.; Bodkin, J. L.; Ballachey, B. E. Estes, J. A. and Patton, J. C. 1996. Mitochondrial DNA 
variation among subspecies and populations of sea otters (Enhydra lutris). Journal of 
Mammalory 77:546-557.  
Dixon, K. R. y Chapman, J. A. 1980. Harmonic mean of animal activity areas.  Ecology 61: 1040-
1044. 
Dallas, J.F.; Marshall, F.; Piertney, S. B.; Bacon, P. J. and Racey, P. A. 2002. Spatially restricted 
gene flow and reduced microsatellite polymorphism in the Eurasian otter Lutra lutra in 
Britain. Conservation genetics 3: 15-28 
Dallas, J. F.; Carss, D. N. and Marshall, F. 2000. Sex identification of the Eurasian otters by PCR 
typing of spraints. Conservation genetics 1: 181-183 


 
 
36
Dallas, J. F.; Bacon, J. P. and Carss, D.N. 1999. Genetic diversity in the Eurasian otters, Lutra lutra, 
in Scotland. Evidence from microsatellite polymorphism. Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society 68: 73-86 
Dallas, J.F. and Piertney, S.B. 1998. Microsatellite primers for the Eurasian Otter. Molecular 
Ecology 7:1247-1263. 
Dallas, J.F.; Coxon, K.E.; Sykes, T.; Chanin, P.R.F.; Marshall, F.; Carss, D.N.; Bacon, P.J.; Piertney, 
S.B. and Racey, P.A. 2003. Similar estimates of population genetic composition and sex ratio 
derived from carcasses and faeces of Eurasian otter Lutra lutra. Molecular Ecology 12:275-282. 
Debrot, S. and Mermod, C. 1983.  The spatial and temporal distribution pattern of stoat (Mustela 
erminea L.). Oecologia 59: 69-73. 
Edwards, A.; Hammond, H.; Jin, L.; Caskey, C. and Chakraborty, R. 1992. Genetic variation at 
five trimeric and tetrameric tandem repeat loci in four human population groups. Genomics 
12:241-253. 
Effenberger, Selma and Franz Suchentrunk. 1999. RFLP analysis of the mitochondrial DNA of 
otters (Lutra lutra) from Europe - implications for conservation of a flagship species. 
Biological Conservation 90: 229-234 
Erlinge, S. and Sandell, M. 1986. Seasonal changes in the social organization of male stoats, 
Mustela erminea: an effect of shifts between two decisive resources. Oikos 47: 57-62. 
Erlinge, S. 1974. Distribution, territoriality and number of the weasel Mustela nivalis in relation to 
prey abundance. Oikos 25: 308-314. 
Erlinge, S. 1977.  Spacing strategy in stoat Mustela erminea. Oikos 28: 32-42. 
Estes, J. A. 1989. Adaptations for aquatic living by carnivores. Pages 242-282 in. J.L. Gittleman, 
(ed). Carnivore Behavior Ecology, and Evolution. Cornell University Press,  New York.  
Fleming, M. A.; Ostrander, E. A. and Cook, J. A. 1999. Microsatellite markers for American mink 
(Mustela vison) and ermine (Mustela erminea). Molecular Ecology 8: 1351-1362.  
Fernandez-Moran, J., Saavedra, D. and Manteca-Vilanova, X.  2002. Reintroductions of the 
eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) in northeaster Spain: Trapping, handling, and medical and 
management. Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 33: 222-227. 
Fernandez-Moran, J.; Perez, E.; Sanmartin, M.; Saavedra, D. and Manteca.Vilanova, X. 2001. 
Reversible inmobilization of eurasian otters with a combination of ketamine and 
medetomidine. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 37: 561-565.     
Frankham, R.; Ballou, J.D. and Briscoe, D.A. 2002. Introduction to Conservation Genetics. 
Cambridge University Press.  
Freund, E.F. and Simon, G.A. 1992.  Estadística Elemental. Octava Edición. Prentice Hall. México.  
Gerell, R. 1970. Home range and movement of the mink Mustela vison Schreber in southern 
Sweden. Oikos 21: 160-173. 
Gilpin, M.E. and Hanski, I. 1991.  Metapopulation Dynamics: Empirical and Theoretical 
Investigations.  Academic Press, London. 


 
 
37
Glade, A. (ed). 1993. Libro Rojo de los vertebrados Chilenos. Actas del simposio “Estado de 
Consevación de la fauna de Vertebrados Terrestres de Chile” CONAF. 
Griffith, M. A. and Fendley, T. T. 1989. Influence of density on movement behaviour and home 
range size of adult bobcats on the Savannah River Plant. In S. D. Miller and D. D. Everett 
(eds). Cats of the World: Biology, Conservation and Management. National Wildlife 
Federation, pp. 237-259. Washington, D.C. 
Hanski. L.A. and Gaggiotti, O. 2004. Ecology, Genetics and Evolution of Metapopulations.  
Academic Press, San Diego.  
Hanski, I.A. and Gilpin, M.E. (eds) 1997. Metapopulation Biology, Ecology, Genetics, and 
Evolution. Academic Press, San Diego. 
Hargis, C.D.; Bissonette, J.A. and Turner, D.L. 1999. The influence of forest fragmentation and 
landscape patterns on American martens.  Journal of Apply Ecology 36:157 – 172. 
Hoover, J. P. 1984. Surgical implantation of radiotelemetry devices in American River Otters. 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medicine Association 185: 1317-1320. 
Hornocker, M. G.; Messick, J. P. and Melquist, W. E. 1983. Spatial strategies in three species of 
Mustelidae. Acta Zoologica Fennica 174: 185-188. 
Jaremovic, R. V. and Croft, D. B. 1987. Comparison of techniques to determine eastern grey 
kangaroo home range. Journal of Wildlife Management 51:921-930. 
Jedrzejewski, W.; Jedrejewska, B. and Szymura. L. 1995. Weasel population response, home 
range, and predation on rodents in a deciduous forest in Poland.  Ecology 76: 179-195.  
Kimura, M. and Weiss, G.H. 1964.  The Stepping stone model of population structure and 
decrease of genetic correlation with distance. Genetics 49: 561 – 576. 
King, C. M.  1975. The home range of the weasel (Mustela nivalis) in an English woodland. Journal 
of Animal ecology 44: 639-668  
Kloskowski, J.; Grendel, A. and Wronka, M. 2000.  The use of fish bones of three farm fish species 
in the diet of the Eurasian otters, Lutra lutra.  Folia Zoologica 49:184–190. 
Kruuk, H. and Moorhaouse, A. 1991. The spatial organization of otters (Lutra lutra) in Shetland. 
The Journal of Zoology London 221: 621-637. 
Kruuk, H. 1995. Wild Otters. Predation and population. Oxford University Press. Oxford.  
Kumar, S.; Tamura, K.; Jakobsen, I.B. and Nei. M. 1993. MEGA. Molecular Evolutionary Genetics 
Analysis. Version 2.1 
Larivière, S. 1998. Lontra felina. Mammalian Species 575: 1-5. 
Larson, S.; Jameson, R.; Bodkin, J.; Staedler, M. and Bentzen, P. 2002. Microsatellite DNA and 
Mitochondrial DNA Variation in Remnant and Translocated Sea Otter (Enhydra lutris) 
Populations, Journal of Mammalogy, 83: 893-906. 
Larson, S.; Jameson, R.; Etinier, M.; Fleming, M. and Bentzen, P. 2002. Loss of Genetic Diversity in 
Sea Otters (Enhydra lutris) associated with the fur trade of the 18th and 19th centuries. 
Molecular Ecology. 11: 1899-1903. 


 
 
38
Lidicker, W. Z. and McCollum, F.C. 1997. Genetic variation in California sea otters. Journal of 
Mammalogy. 78:417-425. 
Lodé, T. 1996. Conspecific tolerance and sexual segregation in the use of space and habitat in the 
European polecat. Acta Theriologica 41: 171-176. 
MacArthur, R.H. and Wilson E.O. 1967. The Theory of Island Biogeography.  Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. 
McCullough, D. R. (ed). 1996. Metapopulation and wildlife conservation. Island Press, 
Washington.  
Medina, G. 1995a. Activity budget and social behavior of marine otter (Lutra  felina) in southern 
Chile. Proceedings VI International Otter Colloquium Pietermaritzburg 1993.  Habitat 11: 62-
64. 
Medina, G. 1995b. Feedings habits of marine otter (Lutra felina) in southern Chile. Proceedings VI 
International Otter Colloquium Pietermaritzburg 1993. Habitat 11: 65-68. 
Medina, G. 1998. Seasonal variation and changes in the diet of southern river otter in different 
freshwater habitats in Chile. Acta Theriologica  43: 285-292. 
Medina-Vogel, G.; Kaufman, V.; Monsalve, R.; and Gómez, V. (2003). The relationship between 
riparian vegetation, woody debris, stream morphology, human activity and the use of rivers 
by southern river otter in Chile. ORYX  37(4): 422 – 430. 
Medina-Vogel, G.; Delgado, C. R.; Alvarez R.E.P.; and Bartheld. J. L.V. 2004. Feeding ecology of 
the marine otter (Lontra felina) in a rocky seashore of the south of Chile. Marine Mammal 
Science. Vol. 20: 134–144. 
Melquist, W.E. 1984. Status survey of otters (Lutrinae) and spotted cats (Felidae) in Latin 
America, UICN. 
Melquist, W. E. and Hornocker, M. G. 1979. Development and use of a telemetry technique for 
study River Otter.  Conference on Wildlife Biotelemetry 2. Laramie, Wyoming 104-114. 
Morin, P.A.; Wallis, J.; Moore, J.J. and  Woodruff, D.S. 1994. Paternity exclusion in a community 
of wild chimpanzees using hypervariable simple sequence repeats. Molecular Ecology, 5:469-
478. 
Murray, V. 1989. Imporved double-stranded DNA sequencing using the linear polymerase chain 
reaction. Nucleic Acid Research 17:88-89. 
O’Connell, M.; Wright, J. M. and Farid, A. 1996. A development of PCR primers for nine 
polymorphic American mink Mustela vison microsatellite loci. Molecular Ecology, 5:311-312. 
Ostfeld, R.; Ebensperger, L.; Klosterman, L. and Castilla, J.C. 1989. Foraging, activity budget and 
social bahaviour of the  South American marine otter Lutra felina (Molina 1782). National 
Geographic Research 5: 422-438.  
Orlog, C. and Lucero, M. 1981. Guía de los mamíferos argentinos. Fundación Miguel Lillo, 
Ministerio de Cultura y educación, Tucumán. República Argentina. 
Pertoldi, C. 2001. Genetic consequences of population decline in the European otter (Lutra lutra): 
an assessment of microsatellite variation in Danish otter from 1883 to 1993. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Science  268, 1775-1781 


 
 
39
Peacock, M.M. and Ray, C. 2001. Dispersal in pikas (Ochotona princeps): combining genetic and 
demographic approaches to reveal spatial and temporal patterns. In J. Clobert; E. Danchin; 
A.A. Dohondt; J.D. Nichols. Dispersal. Oxoford University Press. Pp: 43-56. 
Posada D.; Carandall, K. A. and Templeton, A.R. 2001. GeoDis: a program for the cladistic nested 
analysis of the goegraphical distribuion of genetic haplotypes. Molecular Ecology 9:487-488.  
Posada, D. and Crandall, K. 2001. Intraspecific gene genealogies: trees grafting into networks. 
Trends in Ecology and Evolution 16:37-45. 
Powell, R. A. 1979.  Mustelid Spacing Patterns: variations on a theme by Mustela. Z. f. 
Tierpsychol. 50: 608-618. 
Raymond, M. and Rousset, F. 1995. GENEPOP version 1.2: population genetic software for exact 
tests and ecumeniscism. Journal of Heredity 86: 248-249. 
Ralls, K. and Siniff, D. B. 1990. Time budget and activity patterns in California Sea Otters. Journal 
of Wildlife Management 54: 251-259. 
Ramsden, R. O.; Coppin, P. F. and Johnston, D. H. 1976.  Clinical observation on the use of 
Ketamine Hydrochloridae in wild carnivores. Journal of Wildlife Disieases 12: 221-225. 
Rozas, J.J.C.; Sánchez-DelBarrio, X. and Messeguer, R. 2003. DnaSP , DNA polymorphism 
analyses by the coalenscent and other methods.  
Satta, Y. and Takahata, N. 2004. The distribution of the ancestral haplotype in finite stepping-
stone models with population expansion. Molecular Ecology 13:877-886. 
Sambrook, J.; Russell, D.W. and Sambrook, J. 2001. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. 
3.Ed. CSHL press, New York, U.S.A. 
Samuel, M. D., Pierce, D. J. and Garton, E. O. 1985. Identifying areas of concentrated use within 
the home range. Journal of Animal Ecology 54: 711-719. 
Sauer, T. M., Ben-David, M. and Bowyer, R. T. 1999.  A new application of the adaptive-Kernel 
method:  Estimating linear home ranges of river otters, Lutra canadensis.  The Canadian Field-
Naturalist. 113:419-424. 
Sandell, M. 1989. The mating tactics and spacing patterns of solitary carnivores. In J. L. Gittleman 
(ed). Carnivore behaviour, ecology and evolution. New York, Cornell University Press, pp 
165-182.  
Saunders, D.A., Hobbs, R.J., Margules, C.R. 1991. Biological consequences of ecosystem 
fragmentation: a review.  Conservation Biology 5: 18-32. 
Serfass, T. L.; Brooks, R.P.; Swimley, T.J.; Rymon, L. M. and Hayden, H. 1996.  Considerations for 
capturing, handling and translocating river otters.  Wildlife society Bulletin 24: 25-31. 
Sokal, R.R. and Rolph, F.J. 1981.  Biometry. W.H. Freeman, New York.  
Soto, C. 2004.  Evaluación de un protocolo anestésico y de inmovilización química a base de 
Ketamina y Medetomidina en chungungos Lontra felina (Molina 1782) y huillines Lontra 
provocax (Thomas 1908) y su reviersión con Atipamezol.  Memoria de Título presentada como 
parte de los requisitos para optar al Título de Médico Veterinario.  Escuela de Medicina 
Veterinaria, Universidad Austral de Chile.  Valdivia, Chile 


 
 
40
Slatkin, M. 1985. Rare alleles as indicators of gene flow. Evolution 39: 53-65. 
Slatkin, M. 1995. A measure of population subdivision based on microssatellite allele frequencies. 
Genetics 139:457-462. 
Schneider, S.; Roessli, D.; Excoffier, L. 2000, Arlequin ver. 2.000: A software for population 
genetics data analysis. Genetics and Biometry Laboratory, University of Geneva, Switzerland.  
Schlötterer, C.; Zangerl, B.; (1999) The Use of Imperfect Microsatellites for DNA Fingerprinting 
and Population Genetics. In DNA Profiling and DNA Fingerprinting (Ed. Epplen, J.T.; 
Lubjuhn, T.) Capítulo 10, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, Switzerland, pp. 153-165. 
Simms, D. A. 1979. Studies of an ermine population in southern Ontario. Canadian Journal of 
Zoology 57: 824-832. 
Thompson, I.D. and Arrestad, A.S. 1994. Effects of logging on American martens, and models for 
habitat management.  In S.W. Buskirk; A.S. Harestad; M.G. Raphael and R.A. Powell (eds).  
Martens, Sables and Fishers. Cornell Univeristy Press, Ithaca, pp. 355–367. 
Thompson, J.D.; Gibson, T.J.; Plewniak, F.; Jeanmougin, F.; Higgins, D.G. 1997. The Clustal X 
windows interfase: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality 
analysis tools. Nudeic acid Research 24: 4876–4882. 
Tuross, N. 1994. The Biochemistry of ancient DNA in bone. Experientia. 50:530-535. 
Van Zyll de Jong, C. G. 1972. A systematic review of the Neoartic and Neotropical river otters 
(Genus Lutra, Mustelidae, Carnivora). Life Science Contributions, Royal Ontario Museum, 
80:1-104. 
Verboom, J. and van Apeldoorn, R. 1990.  Effects of habitat fragmentation on the red squirrel, 
Sciurus vulgaris L. Landscape Ecology 4:171–176 
Viviani, C.A. 1969.  Los porcellanidae (Crustacea  Anomura) chilenos. Sonderdruck aus Beiträge 
zur Neotropischen Fauna., Band VI; Heft 1:40–56. 
Wallace, D.C. 1995. Mitochondrial DNA Variation in human evolution, Degenerative Disease, 
and aging. American Journal of Human Genetics 57: 201-223. 
Williams, T.M. and Worthy, G.A.J. 2002.  Anatomy and physiology:  The Challenge of Aquatic 
Living. In A. R. Hoelzel (ed).  Marine Mammal Biology.  An Evolutionary Approach.  
Blackwell Science. Oxford. Pp 73-97.   
Zane, L.; Bargelloni, L. and Patarnello, T. 2002. Strategies for microsatellite isolation: a review. 
Molecular Ecology 11: 1-16. 
 
