--- 
source: 2005-2.pdf
--- 

 
1 
 
 
 
 
ECOLOGY AND CONSERVATION OF OTTERS (LUTRA LUTRA) 
IN LOCH LOMOND AND THE TROSSACHS NATIONAL PARK 
 
DOMINIC J. McCAFFERTY 
Department of Adult & Continuing Education, University of Glasgow, 
St Andrew’s Building, 11 Eldon Street, Glasgow G3 6NH 
 
ABSTRACT 
Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park contains a diverse range of freshwaters and has adjacent 
coastal habitats suitable for otters (Lutra lutra) and their prey.  Otters are found throughout the park and 
previous surveys suggest that they have recently reoccupied areas of their former range.  Otters typically 
have home ranges containing at least 10 – 20 km of river, stream or loch.  However due to variation in 
population density in different habitats it is not yet possible to estimate total population size.  Otters feed on 
most species of fish present within the park and species taken is dependent on availability within different 
rivers and lochs.  Eels are one of the principal prey due to their high energy content and amphibians are 
seasonally important.  Specific requirements in freshwaters are for reed beds and islands for resting and 
breeding.  The greatest threat to otters in the park at the present time is expected to be road mortality.  Given 
the importance of agriculture within the park any potential effects of pollution on otters and their prey will be 
from pesticide use rather than from PCBs that are associated with industry.  Disturbance to otters from 
anglers, walkers and dogs is thought to influence behaviour of animals only for short periods of time, 
however longer term effects of disturbance on breeding females and young is less well understood.  
Improvements in the status of otters within the park could be achieved by prevention of road mortalities, 
protection of breeding sites, habitat management for reed beds and riparian vegetation and long term 
monitoring of water quality and prey biomass. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Scotland has remained a stronghold of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) during its recent population decline in 
England and Wales (Chanin 2003).  Although European otter populations are now recovering and expanding 
into previous parts of their range, the otter is a priority species in the UK biodiversity action plan (Joint 
Nature Conservancy Council 1994).  The otter is listed on Appendix 1 of CITES, Appendix II of the Bern 
Convention and Annexes II and IV of the Habitats Directive.  It is protected under Schedule 5 of the Wildlife 
and Countryside Act 1981 and Schedule 2 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats) Regulations 1994 
(Regulation 38).  The European sub-species is also listed as globally threatened on the IUCN / WCMC Red 
Data List. 
 
There have been four national surveys examining the distribution of otters in Scotland in 1977-9, 1984-5, 
1991-4 (Green & Green 1997) and 2003-4 (completed but unpublished) and several detailed studies on their 
biology and behaviour in the Shetlands (Kruuk 1995), Mull (Watt 1993), Isle of Skye (Yoxon 1999), 
Lochaber (Kruuk & Hewson 1978) and Argyll (McCluskie 1998).  Otters occupying freshwater habitats have 
been examined in detail in NE Scotland on the catchments of the rivers Dee and Don (reviewed in (Kruuk et 
al. 1998) and on the River Earn catchment in Perthshire (Green et al. 1984). 
 
Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park contains a wide range of still and flowing fresh water 
systems that provide suitable habitat for otters and their prey.  Still waters range from large deep lochs such 
as Loch Lomond (7100 ha) to numerous small hill lochs and artificial ponds.  River systems are typically 
well oxygenated, low nutrient waters that predominantly contain fish from the salmonid family.  There are 
also a number of fish populations within the park that are important prey of otters including eels (Anguilla 
anguilla) and cyprinids (Chanin 2003, LL&TNP Fish and Fisheries Forum 2004).  Otters living in the park 
are not confined to freshwater systems as the boundary runs along 65 km (approximately 20 % of the 350 km 
park boundary) of coastline of three sheltered sea lochs.  
 
The aim of this study was to examine the suitability of Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park for 
otters by providing: 
1. 
a review of how otters use freshwater and marine habitats in Scotland, 
2. 
a summary of available information on otters in the Loch Lomond and The Trossachs area 
3. 
an outline of conservation priorities for otters in the national park 
 


 
2 
 
 
 
 
HABITAT USE BY OTTERS 
Otters may occupy both freshwater and marine habitats within their home range and there are ecological 
differences in the way otters use these habitats (Table 1).   
 
 
Freshwater 
Marine coastal 
Main activity pattern 
nocturnal (dawn & dusk) 
diurnal 
Foraging areas 
still and flowing waters 
marshland 
Within 100 m coast 
Mean dive depth and duration 
< 2 m and <15 s (lochs) 
< 2 m and < 20 s 
Specific habitat preferences 
reed beds and islands 
freshwater pools or streams 
Holt and rest sites 
above ground (couches) 
below ground 
underground 
 
Table 1.  Differences in habitat use by freshwater and marine coastal otters. 
Summarised from Kruuk (1995, 1998). 
 
Green et al. (1984) studied two females that occupied between 16 and 22 km while a male occupied 39 km 
of rivers, streams and lochs.  In the river Dee and Don catchments there was a median estimate of one otter 
per 15 km of stream (Kruuk & Hewson 1978).  In Shetland females have been recorded living in group 
ranges of 5 – 14 km of coast, males had larger ranges of up to 19 km overlapping with several group areas 
(Kruuk 1995).  In this area there were on average 0.5 – 0.7 otters per km of coast.  Expressed on an area 
basis these studies suggest that otters are found at densities in the order of one otter per 10 ha of water 
(Kruuk 1995).  However this figure should be used with caution as estimates range between 2 and 50 ha. 
 
Otters forage in a wide range of freshwaters including lochs, artificial lakes, marshland, rivers and 
particularly important are narrow streams with high prey biomass (Kruuk et al. 1998).  Specific habitat 
requirements include reed beds and islands on lochs and rivers.  These are required for resting and breeding 
sites but there appears to be no obvious correlation between otter distribution and vegetation cover (Kruuk et 
al. 1998, Thom et al. 1998).  A variety of secluded sites below and above ground are used as holts, natal 
holts and couches for resting (Kruuk et al. 1998).   
 
Otters occupy a range of coastal habitats in Scotland including both sheltered and exposed shorelines.  The 
distribution of coastal dwelling otters is strongly associated with the occurrence of freshwater pools or 
streams, as this is an essential requirement for maintenance of healthy fur for thermoregulation.  Holt sites 
are often underground below rocks or within peat banks (Kruuk 1995).  In coastal areas otters are generally 
more active during daylight hours, while in freshwater most activity occurs at night, especially at dawn and 
dusk.  This difference in behaviour is related to prey availability.  Many marine prey are less active during 
the day, while in freshwater, some prey are least active at night.  Foraging patterns of otters are also 
influenced by the tide, with otters in Shetland foraging least during high tide (Kruuk 1995).  In coastal areas 
otters feed within 100 m of the coast, diving to depths not exceeding 10 m, with most dives within 2 m of the 
surface and lasting less than 20 seconds.  In freshwater lochs otters dive to similar depths but for slightly 
shorter durations, averaging around 13 seconds and often coming ashore with prey (Conroy & Jenkins 1986).  
In both freshwater lochs and in the sea, otters concentrate their fishing effort in patches, diving and searching 
in a relatively small area of water before moving to new areas (Kruuk 1995).  Otters forage in the margins of 
rivers and streams, avoiding the strongest current, and exploit shallow riffles when feeding on large 
salmonids (Carss et al. 1990).  Marshland habitat is frequently used by otters, especially during spring when 
feeding on amphibians (Weber 1990). 
 
Radio-tracking studies indicate that there is a difference between the use of freshwaters by male and females.  
Green et al. (1984) tracked two female and one male otters over several months.  Within the home range of 
one female there was running water, still water and marshland but this animal spent 73 % of the time in one 
productive artificial lake.  The second female had both running water and marshland within its home range 
and spent 72 % in the latter.  In comparison the male occupied all three habitat types but spent 60 % of the 
time on the main river.  In Deeside, adult males spent 62 % of their time on the main river while females and 


 
3 
 
 
 
 
young males spent 87 % of the time on lochs and small tributaries (Kruuk et al. 1998).  Habitat separation 
between male and female otters has also been recorded in coastal areas at certain times of the year (Kruuk 
1995). 
 
ECOLOGY OF OTTERS IN THE LOCH LOMOND AND THE TROSSACHS AREA 
 
Habitat and distribution 
Much of the information on otters living within the park is based on previous sign surveys (Green & Green 
1997, McCafferty 2005) or anecdotal sightings of animals from members of the public, rangers and 
gamekeepers.  The 1991-4 national survey recorded signs of otters in most freshwater systems within the 
geographical area of park and in the sea lochs bordering the park (Fig. 1).  Nevertheless, future surveys of 
coastal areas are required to establish the importance of marine habitats for otters living within the park.  The 
only known detailed study of otters undertaken within the geographical area of the park was by Green et al 
(1984).  This study highlighted the importance of all freshwater habitats for otters within the upper Earn 
catchment. 
 
Fig 1.  Distribution of otters within Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park as recorded by 
the Vincent Wildlife Trust’s otter surveys of Scotland in the 1980s and 1990s. 
 
 
 
Prey and diet 
The diet of otters in the region of the park is similar to other freshwater areas of Britain, with fish dominating 
the diet and amphibians being particularly common during late winter and spring (Cameron 1981, Green et 
al, 1984, McCafferty in press).  In the upper Earn catchment otters have been recorded feeding on Salmo 
spp., eels, cyprinids, perch (Perca fluviatilis), sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus), amphibians as well as 
birds and mammals (Green et al. 1984).  In Loch Lomond spraints also included ruffe (Gymnocephalus 
cernuus), powan (Coregonus lavaretus), northern pike (Esox lucius) and lampreys (Lampetra spp.) and 
changes in the diet were associated with the migration and spawning habits of a number of species 
(McCafferty In press).  An analysis based on the recovery of otoliths (this study) indicated a similar pattern 
to that previously found.  A total of 268 otoliths (59 %) were recovered from 453 spraints collected from Jan 
- Dec 2002 (see (McCafferty in press for method of recovery).  The frequency of occurrence was ruffe (52 
%), cyprinids (51 %), eel (26 %), Salmo spp. (14 %), powan (4 %), pike (1.5 %) and perch (1.5 %).  Both 


 
4 
 
 
 
 
methods of diet analysis show that the most frequently occurring prey in spraints was the ruffe but there were 
small differences in the rank abundance of cyprinids and eel (Fig. 2).   
 
 
Fig 2.  Frequency of occurrence of fish in otter spraints collected at Loch Lomond in 2002.  Diet was 
determined by counting all remains in all spraints (n = 453) and also using the occurrence of otoliths only (n 
= 208). 
 
The value of different prey for otters is not only dependent on their availability but also on their energy 
content.  Ruffe have the lowest energy content (assuming similarity with perch in the same genus) whereas 
eel have the highest energy content of prey taken by otters (Table 2).   
 
Fish group 
Energy content 
kJg -1 
 
Eel 
6.08 
(Norman 1963) 
Brown trout 
5.92 
(Elliot 1976) 
Cyprinids 
4.82 
(Beja 1996) 
Vertebrate (non-fish) 
4.69 
(Beja 1996) 
Perch 
4.46 
(Prévost 1982) 
 
Table 2.  Energy content of prey taken by otters. 
Values are expressed as kJg -1 fresh body mass according to Beja (1996). 
 
In Loch Lomond the average size of ruffe taken by otters was estimated to be 8.99 cm (range 2.49 – 15.40 
mm (McCafferty in press) which represents an average body mass of 12.7 g (Adams & Tippett 1990).  Based 
on the relationship between otolith width and eel body size the average length of eels taken by otters was 
estimated as 26.6 cm (SE = 12.8 n = 89 range 7.1 – 58.5 Fig. 3) or equivalent to 45.3 g (Martucci et al. 
1993).  This analysis indicates that the energy content of the average ruffe and eel taken by otters is 57 and 
275 kJ respectively.  Eels are therefore five times more profitable prey items than ruffe for otters in terms of  


 
5 
 
 
 
 
their energy content.  Freshwaters with high eel biomass are therefore key areas for otters within the park.  
Factors influencing eel distribution are not well understood but their abundance is thought to be greatest in 
still waters and otters do appear to specialise on them in these areas (Carss et al. 1998) 
 
 
Fig 3.  Comparison of the length (cm) of eel (n = 89) and ruffe (n= 208) taken by otters at Loch Lomond in 
2002.  Fish length was estimated using otolith size for both species (see text). 
 
CONSERVATION PRIORITIES FOR OTTERS IN THE NATIONAL PARK 
The UK Biodiversity action plan lists the current factors causing loss or decline of otters as 1.  pollution of 
watercourses  2.  insufficient prey associated with poor water quality, 3.  impoverished bankside habitat 
features needed for breeding and resting and 4.  incidental mortality, primarily by road deaths and drowning 
in eel traps (www.ukbap.org.uk).  The opportunity of improving the conservation status of otters within the 
park should address each of these issues but as outlined below some of these require greater priority (Table 
3).  Currently, the otter is registered as an Annex II species (present as a qualifying feature, but not a primary 
reason for site selection) in the designation of the Loch Lomond Woods Special Area of Conservation.   
 
 
 
Short term 
Medium term 
Long term 
Road mortality survey and mitigation 
√ 
√ 
 
Breeding records and monitoring 
 
√ 
√ 
Habitat management 
 
√ 
√ 
Distribution survey 
 
 
√ 
Water quality monitoring 
 
 
√ 
Fish biomass surveys 
 
 
√ 
 
Table 3.  Suggested short, medium and long term conservation objectives for otters in 
Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park. 


 
6 
 
 
 
 
Pollution and water quality 
Although there is some controversy over the most important pollutant affecting otter populations, 
contamination with PCBs and / or organochlorine pesticide residues is considered the most likely cause of 
the widespread decline of otters in Europe (Mason & Macdonald 1986; Mason et al. 1992).  The main source 
of PCBs comes from the manufacture and disposal of electrical components.  Given the lack of industry 
within the park there are likely to be no major sources of PCBs for otters.  In 1990-1 relatively high levels of 
PCBs were however recorded in otter spraints collected in Loch Long (Mason et al. 1992).  The nearest 
source of PCBs may therefore come from adjacent marine habitats that are associated with shipping and 
naval activities.   
 
Pesticides including Lindane, Dieldrin and DDT (and its metabolites) were also recorded in spraints within 
the vicinity of the park in the early 1990s (Mason et al. 1992).  Given that land use within the park is 
predominantly for agriculture and forestry, pesticides and their residues are likely to enter freshwater 
systems.  Dieldrin, Aldrin, Endrin, DDT and DDE were recorded in the river Leven at Renton footbridge 
between 2000 and 2003 (Scottish Environmental Protection Agency Harmonised Monitoring Data 
www.sepa.org.uk).  Although the concentrations recorded were extremely low it does highlight that these 
compounds are present in the environment.  No other pesticides have been directly linked to otter declines 
but the increased use of pyrethroid compounds in sheep dips may have indirect effects on otters due to a 
reduction in fish that have lost their invertebrate food supply (Chanin 2003).  Sheep farming is widely 
carried out within the park and therefore any reduction in fish populations (especially eels) as a result of 
pesticide discharge will have an impact on otter populations.   
 
The minimum fish biomass required to support viable otter populations in freshwater habitats is estimated to 
be around 10 gm-2 (Chanin, 2003).  There appear to be no suitable data within the park to examine how otter 
distribution is determined by prey abundance.  A small tributary of the river Almond in Perthshire close to 
the northern boundary of the park contained a salmonid biomass of 16.8 – 22.9 gm-2 (Egglishaw 1970) and 
salmonid and eel biomasses of 9.2 – 14.4 gm-2 and 0.5 – 1.6 gm-2, respectively were recorded in similar 
oligotrophic streams in NE Scotland (Kruuk et al. 1993).  In the long term, monitoring of fish biomass and 
water quality would improve our understanding of otter distribution in the park. 
 
Habitat 
The national otter surveys successfully sampled a range of habitats, and otter sites were well distributed 
throughout the geographical area of the park.  This is a valuable long term data set for monitoring purposes 
and these should be continued in future years.  A survey repeated each decade is probably sufficient to record 
long term population trends.  More important may be the monitoring of how different habitats are used by 
otters and ways to improve their suitability.  In particular, bankside vegetation and reed beds are important 
habitats for resting and breeding (Kruuk et al. 1998).  The protection of these habitats or preferably an 
increase in the area of reed beds would have beneficial effects for otters. 
 
Road mortalities and eel trapping 
Given the extensive network of roads within the park it is likely that vehicles will kill many otters.  A recent 
study by Green (In press) recorded 50 otter deaths on 156 km of the A75 over 12 months or equivalent to 1 
death per 3.12 km per year.  Main roads with large volumes of traffic account for high mortality of otters 
throughout the UK (Philcox et al. 1999).  Road mortality is greatest during periods of high river flow that 
cause otters to travel overland.  Given that the park has more than 600 km of roads, including five main trunk 
roads it is expected that this will be the major human impact on otter populations within the park.  A road 
mortality monitoring scheme is required to determine the extent of the problem and identify areas where 
changes to design of bridges or culverts is needed. 
 
Although eels have been commercially fished in Loch Lomond and river Endrick, incidental mortality from 
by-catch in eel traps is expected to be low as the trapping of eels is scarce today (Mitchell 2001). 
 
Disturbance 
The national park is an important area for recreation and tourism and therefore what is the effect of human 
disturbance on otters?  Chanin (2003) recently concluded that the recovery of the otter population is not 
being influenced by human disturbance and anecdotal evidence suggests that otters are not seriously affected 
by disturbance from anglers, walkers and dogs.  Otters do not appear to avoid houses, industry, roads, 


 
7 
 
 
 
 
campsites and much of the mess left by people (Kruuk (1995).  The response of otters to the sounds of 
anglers or walkers with dogs is for otters to move to a position where they can see the source of disturbance, 
dive and swim underwater, then resurface and rest on the bank before resuming their previous activity a short 
while later (Durbin 1993).  Green et al. (1984) also noted that that otters passed fisherman by land, 
underwater or through dense vegetation and then continued their activities.   
 
Although individual otters do not appear to be influenced by short periods of disturbance there is a lack of 
information on how sustained levels of disturbance influences female otters with young.  This may be 
particularly relevant in areas such as Loch Lomond where there is a high level of disturbance at certain times 
of the year.  A main priority will be to identify breeding sites and monitor breeding success of otters to assess 
the effects of disturbance in different areas. 
 
SUMMARY 
Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park contains a diverse range of freshwaters and has adjacent 
marine coastal habitats suitable for otters and their prey.  Otters appear to be widely distributed throughout 
the park and previous surveys suggest that they have reoccupied areas of their former range.  The main 
conflict with humans within the park is likely to be as a result of road mortality.  There is therefore a need to 
identify where road casualties occur so that measures can be implemented to reduce them.  Monitoring of 
otter breeding sites is required to safeguard sites from habitat change or possible disturbance to females with 
young.  Management is recommended to increase the area of important reed bed habitat for breeding and rest 
sites.  Finally our understanding of otter distribution within the park would be improved by collecting data 
on fish biomass and water quality. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I thank the Vincent Wildlife Trust for permission to publish previous otter survey data and Martin Ross and 
Anne Jackson of Loch Lomond & The Trossachs National Park Authority (LLTNPA) for creating Fig. 1 
using GIS data.  Marion McCahon and Alan Bell (LLTNPA) kindly supplied relevant park statistics.  Thanks 
to Colin Adams for help with otolith identification and useful discussions about Loch Lomond.  I am grateful 
to the Blodwen Lloyd-Binns Bequest (Glasgow Natural History Society) for funding the diet study on Loch 
Lomond. 
 
REFERENCES 
Adams, C. E. & Tippett, R. (1990). The status of the fish community of Loch Lomond.  Unpublished Report 
Scottish Natural Heritage.  
Beja, P. R. (1996). An analysis of otter Lutra lutra predation on introduced American crayfish Procambarus 
clarkii in Iberian streams. Journal of Applied Ecology, 33, 1156-1170. 
Cameron, J. M. (1981). The food of otters (Lutra lutra) and feral mink (Mustela vison) on parts of the river 
Endrick within Loch Lomond National Nature Reserve from March to October 1980. Unpublished 
report. Nature Conservancy Council South West (Scotland) Region.  
Carss, D. N., Kruuk, H. & Conroy, J. W. H. (1990). Predation on Adult Atlantic Salmon, Salmo-Salar L, by 
Otters, Lutra-Lutra (L), within the River Dee System, Aberdeenshire, Scotland. Journal of Fish 
Biology, 37, 935-944. 
Carss, D. N., Nelson, K. C., Bacon, P. J. & Kruuk, H. (1998). Otter (Lutra lutra) prey selection in relation to 
fish abundance and community structure in two different freshwater habitats. Zoological Society of 
London Symposia, 71, 191-213 Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.  
Chanin, P. (2003). Ecology of the European otter. Conserving Natura 2000 Rivers Ecology Series.10.  
Peterborough, English Nature.  
Conroy, J. W. H. & Jenkins, D. (1986). Ecology of otters in northern Scotland. VI. Diving times and hunting 
success of otters (Lutra lutra) at Dinnet Lochs, Aberdeenshire and in Yell Sound, Shetland. Journal of 
Zoology (London), 209, 341-346. 
Durbin, L. S. (1993). Food and habitat utilisation of otters (Lutra lutra L) in a riparian habitat - the River 
Don in north-east Scotland. PhD Thesis, University of Aberdeen. 
Egglishaw, H. J. (1970). Production of salmon and trout in a stream in Scotland. Journal of Fish Biology, 2, 
117-136. 
Elliot, J. M. (1976). Body composition of brown trout (Salmo trutta) in relation to temperature and ration 
size. Journal of Animal Ecology, 45, 273-289. 


 
8 
 
 
 
 
Green, J., Green, R. & Jefferies, D. J. (1984). A radio-tracking survey of otters Lutra lutra on a Perthshire 
river system. Lutra, 27, 85-145. 
Green, R. (In press).  An estimate of the number of otters (Lutra lutra) killed on Scottish roads.  International 
Otter Survival Fund. The return of the otter in Europe. European otter conference.  Sabhal Mor Ostaig, 
Isle of Skye Scotland.  
Green, R. & Green, J. (1997).  Otter survey of Scotland 1991-1994.  The Vincent Wildlife Trust, London.  
Joint Nature Conservancy Council. (1994).  Biodiversity : the UK action plan. HMSO, London. 
Kruuk, H. (1995). Wild otters predation and populations. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Kruuk, H., Carss, D. N., Conroy, J. W. H. & Durbin, L. S. (1993). Otter (Lutra lutra L.) numbers and fish 
productivity in rivers in north-east Scotland. Zoological Society of London Symposia, 65, 171-191 
Oxford, Clarendon Press.  
Kruuk, H., Carss, D. N., Conroy, J. W. H. & Gaywood, M. J. (1998). Habitat use and conservation of otters 
(Lutra lutra) in Britain. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 71, 119-133. Cambridge, 
Cambrdge University Press.  
Kruuk, H. & Hewson, R. (1978). Spacing and foraging of otters (Lutra lutra) in a marine environment. 
Journal of Zoology (London), 185, 205-212. 
Loch Lomond and The Trossachs Fish and Fisheries Forum (2004). Review of fish and fisheries 
management in Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park.  Balloch, Loch Lomond and The 
Trossachs National Park.  
Martucci, O., Pietrelli, L. & Consiglio, C. (1993). Fish otoliths as indicators of the cormorant Phalacrocorax 
carbo diet (Aves, Pelecaniformes). Bollettino di Zoologia, 60, 393-396. 
Mason, C. F. & Macdonald, S. M. (1986). Otters: ecology and conservation. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Mason, C. F., Macdonald, S. M., Bland, H. C. & Ratford, J. (1992). Organochlorine pesticide and PCB 
contents in otter (Lutra lutra) scats from western Scotland. Water Air and Soil Pollution, 64, 617-626. 
McCafferty, D. J. (In press). Distribution and population status of the otter (Lutra lutra) in the Loch Lomond 
area.  Glasgow Naturalist. 
McCafferty, D. J. (In press). Dietary response of otters (Lutra lutra) to introduced prey in Loch Lomond, 
Scotland.  Journal of Zoology (London).  
McCluskie, A. E. (1998). Temperature-mediated shifts in the foraging behaviour of the Eurasian otter, Lutra 
lutra L.  PhD Thesis, University of Glasgow. 
Mitchell, J. (2001). Loch Lomondside. Harper Collins, London. 
Norman, J. R. (1963). Metabolism and thermoregulation in the sea otter. Physiological Zoology, 47, 218-
229. 
Philcox, C. K., Grogan, A. L. & Macdonald, D. W. (1999). Patterns of otter Lutra lutra road mortality in 
Britain. Journal of Applied Ecology, 36, 748-762. 
Prévost, Y. A. (1982). The wintering ecology of ospreys in Sengambia. PhD Thesis, University of 
Edinburgh. 
Thom, T. J., Thomas, C. J., Dunstone, N. & Evans, P. R. (1998). The relationship between riverbank habitat 
and prey availability and the distribution of otter (Lutra lutra) signs: an analysis using a geographical 
information system. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 71, 135-157. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Watt, J. P. (1993). Ontogeny of hunting behaviour of otters (Lutra lutra L.) in a marine environment. 
Symposia of the Zoological Society of London. 65, 87-104. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
Weber, J.-M. (1990). Seasonal exploitation of amphibians by otters (Lutra lutra) in north-east Scotland. 
Journal of Zoology (London), 220, 641-651. 
Yoxon, P. (1999). The effect of geology on the distribution of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) on the Isle of 
Skye. Open University, Milton Keynes. 
