--- 
source: 2005-6.pdf
--- 

TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL HARVEST PATTERNS OF 
RIVER OTTER IN LOUISIANA AND ITS POTENTIAL USE AS A BIOINDICATOR
SPECIES OF WATER QUALITY
A Dissertation
Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of the
Louisiana State University and
Agricultural and Mechanical College
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
in
The School of Renewable Natural Resources
by
Daniel G. Scognamillo
B.S., Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, 1993
M.S., University of Florida, 2001
May 2005


ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was partially funded by the Johnston Science Foundation and the Louisiana
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. I would like to thank Dr. Mike Chamberlain, my advisor,
who has been a permanent support since the first time I met him (I think we both learnt from this
experience). I would also like to thank the members of my committee Drs. Bill Kelso, Andy
Nyman, Nina Lam, Chris Finelli, and Joseph Siebenaller for their time, interest, and comments.
Greg Linscombe (LA Department of Wildlife and Fisheries) was there when I needed him. Mr
William Boone and Mr Ulysses Guidry (two pieces of living history of Louisiana) offered me
help and support when collecting otter carcasses. They showed me the real Louisianan culture.
Dr. Blackmon and Ms Nedra Ghoram answer all the questions I asked and solved all the
administrative problems during the ‘doctoral journey’. Chats and scientific discussions with
other graduate students in my lab were always enriching. I thank them too. I would like to thank
Dr. Mel Sunquist and his wife Fiona who have supported me professionally and personally
throughout the years. But without any doubts my family was the biggest support I had. I would
like to thank my beloved wife Inés and our children Valentín and Luisa for their patience and all
these years of happiness, laughs, inspiration, sacrifice, and craziness. 


iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .......................................................................................................... ii
ABSTRACT ............................................................................................................................... v
CHAPTER
1 RIVER OTTER AS A NATURAL RESOURCE IN LOUISIANA ...........................1
2 SPATIAL DYNAMICS OF RIVER OTTER HARVEST
   IN LOUISIANA DURING 1984-2003 ...................................................................... 6
    Methods .................................................................................................................... 8
    Results .....................................................................................................................11
    Discussion .............................................................................................................. 16
3 TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF RIVER OTTER HARVEST
   IN LOUISIANA DURING 1957-2004 .................................................................... 27
    Methods .................................................................................................................. 28
Some Concepts and Nomenclature Used in Time Series Analysis ................ 28
Cross-correlation ............................................................................................ 30
Regression Analysis ....................................................................................... 30
ARIMA Models ............................................................................................. 31
Transfer Function Models .............................................................................. 32
Spectral Analysis ............................................................................................ 32
    Results .................................................................................................................... 33
Regression Analysis ........................................................................................33
ARIMA Models .............................................................................................. 34
Transfer Function Models ...............................................................................42
    Discussion .............................................................................................................. 44
4 RIVER OTTER PELTS TIME SERIES AND ITS
   BIOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION ..................................................................... 52
    Methods ................................................................................................................. 53
    Results ................................................................................................................... 54
    Discussion ............................................................................................................. 55
5 RIVER OTTER AS AN INDICATOR SPECIES OF
  WATER QUALITY IN LOUISIANA ..................................................................... 62
    Methods ................................................................................................................. 64
    Results ................................................................................................................... 65
    Discussion ............................................................................................................. 66
6 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH ON RIVER OTTER  ................. 74
REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................... 76


iv
APPENDIX
SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF NUMBER OF OTTER PELTS HARVESTED
AND OTTERS PER TRAPPER IN LOUISIANA DURING 1984-2003 ............... 85
VITA .................................................................................................................................... 93


v
ABSTRACT
Louisiana is the leading state in number of river otters used in reintroduction programs in
other states and in the production of pelts. However, habitat loss and degradation have prompted
concern about the status of otter populations. This dissertation undertakes a spatial and temporal
analysis of river otter harvest activity and examines environmental factors related to monitoring
mercury levels in streams in Louisiana. Harvest data for 1957-2004 were analyzed to identify
spatial and temporal trends in otter harvest activity. Changes have occurred in the last 20 years in
the spatial dynamics of otter harvest in Louisiana, these include an increasing proportion of
harvested otters coming from upland parishes in more recent years, and an increase in the
proportion of trappers catching otters in that region. Spatial analysis indicated that this shift in
harvesting activity has been gradual rather than abrupt. An explanation for this shift could be a
greater interest of upland trappers in catching otters because of increasing otter pelt price and a
decline in pelt price for other furbearer species. Analyses indicated that a management plan
based on spatial control of harvest could be an option in Louisiana, with rice fields and protected
areas playing an important role in the management/conservation plan. Temporal analysis
suggested that the number of otters harvested 1 and 5 years ago has an impact on number of
otters harvested at present time. An autoregressive model was developed to describe this
association and to forecast number of otter pelts to be harvested 1 year in the future. The
structure identified in the harvest data was used to develop a model to describe the dynamics of
the otter populations. The simulation using 4-year and 8-year periods offered a reasonable
approximation to the estimated cyclic dynamics of otter population in Louisiana. Mercury levels
in otters were compared to levels in fish collected in different streams in Louisiana. Mercury
levels in otters were higher than in fish. Otter samples also identified streams where mercury 


vi
level in water may require further analysis. These results suggested that a mercury monitoring
program based on river otters could be feasible in Louisiana.


1
CHAPTER 1
RIVER OTTER AS A NATURAL RESOURCE IN LOUISIANA
Uncertainty in resource status and the lack of knowledge of processes governing
dynamics of populations are probably the main problems facing managers when trying to define
strategies for sustainable use of renewable natural resources (Rosenberg et al. 1993). It has been
this uncertainty that has generated opposite points of view regarding the real possibilities of
achieving a sustainable use of natural resources (Ludwig et al. 1993, Rosenberg et al. 1993).
Uncertainty, defined as ‘the state of knowledge about the relationship between the world,
and a statement about the world’ (Hunsaker 2001), could have multiple sources when it refers to
the status of natural resources. Some sources of uncertainty could be intrinsic, such as poor
understanding of the ecology, natural history, or behavior of the species; whereas extrinsic
sources also are possible, such as ones originating from environmental stochasticity. For
instance, poor knowledge of the reproductive biology of the species being exploited could lead
to local or regional extirpation of its populations. Conversely, even if vast information on
population dynamics is available, the fact that a harvest rate sustainable under certain
environmental conditions could be not sustainable after a shift in those conditions also could
drive a population to extinction. It has been noted that, in the face of substantial uncertainty,
managers of fisheries resources have been under pressure to maintain high harvest levels despite
scientific advice suggesting a decrease in that level (Sissenwine and Rosenberg 1993), resulting
in overexploitation of the resource (Rosenberg et al. 1993) 
Knowledge of population dynamics of secretive animals is usually scarce, which
increases the uncertainty about effects of harvest on the population. That is the case for river
otter (Lontra canadensis), a furbearer species with a long history in the fur trade market.


2
River otters inhabited much of the North American continent by the time European
settlers arrived (Melquist et al.2003), and because of the characteristics of its fur, the species
became a valuable resource to the settlers, as shown by early records from New England
indicating that the species has been traded in the fur market since the 16th century (Melquist and
Dronkert 1987). Its economic value resulted in overharvest of otter populations in North
America, contributing to extirpation of the species from some areas of its range by the mid 1800s
(Armstrong 1972).
River otter also is very sensitive to habitat changes, and otter populations have been
affected indirectly by human activities like agriculture, forestry, and industry (Kruuk 1995).
Water pollution and habitat modification and loss also are among the most important threats to
river otter populations. Drainage of wetlands for conversion into agricultural lands has been an
important source of habitat loss for otters (Lowery 1974), but toxic chemicals such as PCBs and
mercury have also been blamed for the decline of otter populations (Mason and Wren 2001).
During the 1970s and early 1980s, concern about river otter declines in North America
(ESSA, 1978) led many wildlife management agencies to conduct surveys to determine the
conservation status of river otter populations. In the United States in the 1970s, the species had
been extirpated in 11 states and experienced severe decline in 9 others (Nilsson 1980), which
stimulated national and international efforts to expand existing populations and re-introduce
extinct populations (Halbrook et al. 1996). More than 4,000 otters have been released in 21
states in the United States and 1 Canadian province (Alberta) since the late 1970s through
re-introduction projects (Hubbard and Serfass, in press), successfully restoring most of the
extirpated populations (Raesly 2001).
Louisiana leads the United States as a source for otters to be used in re-introduction
projects (Raelsy 2001) and in the production of river otter pelts (Shirley et al. 1988). Raesly


3
(2001) reported that 64% of reintroduction projects released at least some animals from
Louisiana, and Linscombe and Kinler (1985) determined that from 1970 to 1982, an average of
7,470 otters were harvested annually in Louisiana. The exploitation of Louisiana otters for
restoration projects and pelts mandates reliable and effective management and conservation
strategies, particularly addressing the impact of human activities on otter populations (e.g.,
harvesting and release of environmental contaminants). Understanding these issues is a necessity
for management and monitoring programs that are not only concerned with welfare of otter
populations, but also with the aquatic ecosystems that support them.
In Louisiana, otter populations have been described as more abundant in coastal areas
(Shirley et al. 1988, Chabreck et al. 1985, Ensminger and Linscombe 1980), although upland
parishes also may support large populations (Chabreck et al. 1985). Upland parishes differ from
the coast geologically, geographically, vegetationally, and in the level and kind of human
activities, which could generate different dynamics for otter populations in upland areas. Despite
its statewide distribution, the large number of otters harvested every year, and the lack of
knowledge of population dynamics, no studies have been conducted on river otters in Louisiana
for more than 20 years. General information about its ecology was reported by Lowery (1974),
and some detailed information about habitat use, abundance and distribution, and diet have been
published (Chabreck et al. 1982; 1985, Edwards 1983, Holcombe 1980).
As mentioned above, river otter is among the most important furbearer species in
Louisiana, and harvest records per trapping season have been kept almost without interruption
since 1914 by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries (LDWF). Starting in 1977,
LDWF also began requiring fur buyers and dealers to record directly from trappers the species,
approximate date, and parishes for all furbearer species trapped.


4
Harvesting data are a valuable source of information, particularly when no other sources
are available for a particular species. This study presents the analysis of the database kept by the
LDWF for the period 1957-2004, focusing on the following variables: number of otters
harvested, number of licensed trappers, and number of trappers that caught those otters (otter
trappers) each trapping season. Harvesting ratio (otters/otter trappers) per trapping season and
parish was estimated and also included in the analysis. Each trapping season was named by the
year in which it ended, i.e., if a particular trapping season started December 1 1983, and ended
March 31 1984, that trapping season was named ‘1984'. Data were analyzed and summarized at
different scales. Pooled data across seasons and parishes were used to summarize data at the state
level or for the whole period analyzed, whereas data by parish in each trapping season was used
to analyze data at a finer scale. Data analysis also was performed at a regional scale, dividing the
state into coastal and upland regions following Linscombe and Kinler (1985).
The following chapters offer an overview of river otter harvest in Louisiana during 1957-
2004 describing spatial and temporal trends, and how these harvesting patterns could be
incorporated into the development of a management plan for otters in Louisiana. Some insights
into otter population dynamics also are presented. Chapter 2 presents a spatial approach in the
analysis of the data for 1984-2003. Spatial trends in harvest activity are identified and described.
Chapter 2 also evaluates the possibility of developing a management plan for river otters in
Louisiana based on the concept of Marine Protected Areas (MPA), which is currently used in the
fisheries industry. Chapter 3 focuses on the identification of temporal patterns in harvesting
using time series analysis. A simple model is presented to forecast number of river otters
harvested one trapping season in the future. Chapter 4 describes the analyses of the same time
series for number of otters harvested and relates the structure of this time series to the possible 


5
structure of the actual otter population. A model that describes the possible dynamics of otter
populations in coastal Louisiana is discussed.
Chapter 5 describes the analysis of mercury levels in otter tissue in Louisiana and
discusses the feasibility of using otters as an indicator species. Regarding water contamination,
the fact that otters are fish-eating mammals that can bioaccumulate persistent, waterborne
contaminants to levels significantly above environmental concentration (Roos et al. 2001,
Sjöåsen et al. 1997, Halbrook et al. 1996, Mason 1989, Mason and Wren 2001, Mason and Mac
Donald 1993) creates the potential that otters could be used as a bioindicator species in
environmental monitoring programs. The large sample size of carcasses that may be available
from harvesting activities across Louisiana provides an excellent opportunity to obtain samples
necessary to use otters as a bioindicator species at the state or regional level. Finally, Chapter 6
presents an overview on how the findings of this study could be used as a starting point for the
development of a sound management plan for river otters in Louisiana. All the information and
results generated by this study could contribute to the development of a spatially explicit model
that could be used to predict specific locations in the landscape where otter management or
conservation planning efforts, and water quality monitoring programs should be concentrated.


6
CHAPTER 2
SPATIAL DYNAMICS OF RIVER OTTER HARVEST 
IN LOUISIANA DURING 1984-2003
The fur trade has played an important role in the economic development of North
America since European settlement. In some regions fur trading was only a secondary activity
against other economic activities like mining, forestry, or agriculture (Ray 1987); however, in
other places like Louisiana, trapping and fur trading continues to be an important activity for the
local economy and also has become part of the cultural heritage (Tarver et al. 1987).
Louisiana has been for many decades at the top of the list of areas in North American in
fur production (St. Amant 1959, Linscombe and Kinler 1985), particularly in the production of
river otter pelts, where the state leads the United States in number of pelts produced (St. Amant
1959, Ensminger and Linscombe 1980, Linscombe and Kinler 1985, Shirley et al. 1988).
Louisiana also has been the main source of live individuals to be released in re-introduction
projects across the nation (Raelsy 2001).
Decline of river otter populations was severe during the 19th century (Armstrong 1972),
with overharvest as one of the main reasons for that decline. Overharvest is a common issue in
natural resource management (Caughley 1977, Getz and Haight 1989, Clark 1990,), sometimes a
consequence of lack or inappropriate management plans, but lack of knowledge of the target
species is probably the main problem facing conservation and managing agencies. Considering
that riparian habitat is key for river otter survival and reproduction (Kruuk 1995, Melquist et al.
2003), information on habitat use and availability becomes crucial for the development of
conservation and management plans. In this regard, when habitat loss and degradation are
ongoing processes, actions should be taken to understand the impact of habitat modifications on
river otter populations (Melquist and Dronkert 1987).


7
Production of otter pelts in Louisiana is high, and it has been associated with the
abundance of suitable habitat (St. Amant 1959, Chabreck et al. 1985, Linscombe and Kinler
1985). Some concerns about river otter population status in Louisiana as a consequence of
habitat loss and degradation were expressed in the 1970s, when large areas covered by forested
wetlands in northeastern parishes began to be drained, cleared, or converted to croplands
(Lowery 1974, National Research Council 1982). In coastal areas the loss of wetlands and
marshes due to coastal erosion (Boesch et al. 1994) also could be seen as a potential source of
habitat loss. Pesticides and heavy metals have been identified as potentially important agents in
river otter habitat degradation in Louisiana (Beck 1977, Fleming et al. 1985), but despite these
concerns, no studies have been conducted on otters in Louisiana for almost 20 years and,
consequently, the status of populations remains unknown.
Declines in habitats, and wildlife and marine harvests have prompted calls in the
international community to take actions. Fisheries have taken the lead by developing an
Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries (EAF) and encouraging the use of Marine Protected Areas
(MPAs) as an integral part of an optimal management system (Balmford et al. 2004). Advocates
of the implementation of MPAs offer two main arguments for their use, i) MPAs will provide an
insurance policy against management failures resulting from lack of knowledge or insufficient
understanding of the system being managed, and ii) MPAs and other spatial controls on fishing
activities can increase the net sustainable value derived from the resource being managed beyond
the value derived if the spatial controls are not adopted (Bonhsack 1993, Holland 2002, Sumaila
1998). Some developments on the idea of spatially structured harvesting strategies for wildlife 
have been explored by McCullough (1996), but the concept remains unexplored in wildlife
management.


8
There are many reasons that prompt the implementation of a management of plan for
river otters in Louisiana: i) river otter is an elusive and secretive species, making the knowledge
of the species and its populations status limited (Melquist et al. 2003), and ii) it is a top predator
in freshwater systems in Louisiana, representing a potential umbrella species for our
conservation efforts of many other species in these ecosystems. Considering the poor knowledge
of biological and ecological aspects of this species in Louisiana, developing a management plan
based on spatially structured harvesting strategies seems a suitable approach. The urgent need for
a management plan for the species is also supported by the fact that the species seems to be
heavily harvested in the state and by the uncertainty related to the species response to changes in
habitat availability and quality. As a first step in the development of such a plan, in this chapter I
analyze spatially referenced harvesting records maintained by the Louisiana Department of
Wildlife and Fisheries (LDWF) during 1984-2003 to describe spatial patterns in otter harvesting.
The identification and description of these patterns will be a valuable tool in setting the basis for
a sustainable use of this charismatic species in Louisiana. There is particular interest in
identifying areas of high/low otter production, in knowing if those areas change over time, and in
the association of those changes to changes in habitat availability. These findings also could be
used as a starting point for future research, particularly in developing hypotheses and research
questions, and identifying potential study areas.
Methods
I analyzed river otter harvest data collected by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and
Fisheries during 1984-2003. I used exploratory spatial data analysis (ESDA) techniques (Haining
2003) to summarize data, and to detect patterns and generate hypotheses (Tukey 1977, Good
1983). ESDA techniques could be considered an extension of exploratory data analysis (EDA),
and since spatial associations are considered in the analysis, theses techniques will allow


9
X
W X
n
Y
W Y
n
i
i
i
n
i i
i
n
=
=
=
=
∑
∑
1
1
;
answers to questions such as: Where do the extreme values for a particular variable in a boxplot
fall on a map? Where do the areas with highest/lowest variability fall on a map? or, which areas
consistently show high/low values for a particular variable? Maps for each trapping season and
boxplots for each variable were generated with ArcView (ESRI v3.3 2002) and SigmaPlot 8.02a
(Systat Software, Inc. 2002). Because differences in habitats exist between coastal and upland
areas (Chabreck et al. 1985, 2001), separate boxplots for each region also were generated. To
monitor changes in the proportion of otter trappers/licensed trappers each season between coastal
and upland areas, significant differences (" = 0.05 ) were tested using 2-proportion tests (Ott and
Longnecker 2001).
Changes in the location of the weighted mean center (Shaw and Wheeler 1988, Levine
2002) were used to identify spatial changes in total number of otter harvested, trappers, and
harvest ratio (number of otters/ number trappers who caught those otters) in different parishes
during the period analyzed. This is given by
where 
and 
represent the mean of all point coordinates Xi and Yi, respectively, 
X
Y
Wi
represents the weight variable, and n is the sample size.
From a geographical standpoint, data available for this study represented aggregated data;
in other words values of different variables were associated to a polygon (i.e. parish, instead of a
point). Thus, to estimate the weighted mean center, aggregated data were transformed into point
data by assigning values of each variable associated to a particular parish (polygon) to the
centroid (point) of that parish. I defined centroid as the central location within a specified
geographic area (e.g., parish). Then, all the parish centroids were used as the set of points from


10
which to estimate the weighted mean center for each trapping season. In this particular case,
each point involved in the mean center estimation was weighted by the focus variable (i.e.,
number of otters, licensed trappers, harvest rate) in each parish.
The weighted mean center produced a different mean center than the unweighted mean.
For instance, by using number of otters trapped in each parish each season as the weighting
variable, the mean center was displaced toward areas with greater number of otters harvested.
Mapping this mean center for each trapping season allowed me to describe the spatial
differentiation in the central tendency of each variable through time. CrimeStat 2.0 (Levine
2002) was used to estimate the weighted mean center, and ArcView 3.3 (ESRI 2002, Spatial
Analyst Extension) for centroid identification and graphical display of mappable results.
I used Moran’s scatterplot and Moran’s I (Anselin 1996, Fotheringham et al. 2000) to
identify global spatial trends across Louisiana in mean number of otters and mean harvest ratio,
where global associations could be defined as associations that apply equally across the study
area assuming that the relationship being examined does not vary across the study area.
Moran’s I estimates the degree of linear association between a vector of observed values y and a
weighted average of the neighboring values, or spatial lag, Wy. Neighboring values were
estimated with the rook’s definition of contiguity between parishes (Upton and Fingleton 1985).
For details and interpretation of Moran’s I and scatterplot see Anselin (1996).
To identify areas where total otter harvest and harvesting rate were consistently high over
the years, I used the standardized Local Moran’s statistic Z(Ii) (Anselin 1995, Fotheringham et
al. 2000) which focuses on the presence of differences across space rather than assuming that
such variations do not exist (Fotheringham et al. 2000). This local analysis is applied to each
individual point/zone, and the index I indicates clustering or dispersion relative to the local
neighborhood.  Zones with  high I values have an intensity value that is higher than their
neighbors whereas points with low I values have intensity values lower than their neighbors.


11
[
]
I
Z
Z
S
W
Z
Z
i
i
z
ij
j
j
n
=
−
−
=
∑
(
)
(
)
2
1
W
d
ij
ij
= 1
The equation that describes Local Moran’s statistic is given by
where 
 is the mean intensity over all observations (n), Zi is the intensity of observation i, Zj is
Z
the intensity for all other observations, j (where j
i), 
is the variance over all observations,
≠
Sz
2
and Wij is a distance weight for the interaction between observations i and j. The distance
weights between parishes were defined as
were dij is the distance between the centroid of observation zone i (parish i), and another
observation j (parish j).
Local Moran’s I is a suitable tool for the identification of ‘hot spots’ and ‘cold spots’.
Hot spots were defined as zones which are similar to the neighboring zones in terms of the
values for the variable being analyzed. Thus, a hot spot could be a region where neighboring
parishes have either high or low harvesting rate. Cold spots were defined as areas which were
different from their neighborhood in terms of number of otters harvested or harvest rate. Moran’s
scatterplots and global Moran’s I were generated with the software GoeDA v 0.9.5-i5 (Anselin
2004), and Local Moran’s I using Crime Stat v 2.0
Results
Twenty one parishes were categorized as coastal parishes following Linscombe and
Kinler (1985) (Figure 2.1). A total of 58,019 otters were harvested in Louisiana by 7,341
trappers during the 15 trapping seasons analyzed (see Table 2.1). Boxplots for upland and coastal
areas indicated a left skewed distribution of the number of otters harvested each season (Figure
2.2), with the median always being below 200 otters in coastal parishes and below 50 otters in
upland parishes. The number of otters harvested per trapper in coastal and upland areas showed a 


12
symmetric distribution in coastal areas and a left skewed distribution in upland parishes (Figure
2.3).  
Results from 2-proportion tests indicated that the proportion of otter trappers/licensed
trappers in coastal and upland parishes changed throughout time (Table 2.2). Number of otters
harvested varied across space and time (Appendix). These maps show number of otters harvested
and otter per trapper in each of the 64 parishes for the 15 trapping seasons, and their comparison
suggested changes in harvest activity for the period analyzed. A formal estimate of that variation
is shown by mapping the spatial distribution of the coefficient of variation for number of otters
harvested and number of otters per trapper (Figure 2.4). In addition to variations at the parish
level (Figure 2.4), spatial changes in the number of otters harvested at the state level were
indicated by the gradual southeast-northwest shift from 1984 to 2003 in the location of the
weighted mean center (Figure 2.5).
Figure 2.1. Map showing location of coastal and upland areas in Louisiana.


13
Table 2.1. Number of otters, otter trappers, and licensed trappers for upland and coastal
Louisiana for 15 trapping seasons during 1984-2003.
trapping
season
otters
otter trappers
total licensed trappers
coast (%)
upland (%)
coast (%)
upland (%)
coast (%)
upland (%)
1984
3122 (84)
587 (16)
547(73)
199(27)
3752(45)
4621(55)
1985
3363(84)
646(16)
438(70)
194(30)
5425(57)
4180(43)
1986
2601(72)
1015(28)
464(58)
342(42)
4054(44)
5110(56)
1987
3507(71)
1429(29)
698(54)
590(46)
2571(47)
2967(53)
1988
2702(77)
833(23)
545(60)
358(40)
2651(47)
2969(53)
1993
1056(58)
778(42)
58(29)
145(71)
384(46)
461(54)
1994
2435(72)
948(28)
150(45)
186(55)
515(49)
536(51)
1995
4828(75)
1620(25)
266(50)
272(50)
797(48)
864(52)
1996
5363(78)
1546(22)
173(47)
194(53)
651(49)
692(51)
1998
1532(44)
1951(56)
138(30)
329(70)
889(43)
1169(57)
1999
1392(60)
922(40)
118(47)
135(53)
713(55)
593(45)
2000
1326(50)
1331(50)
106(37)
179(63)
257(43)
347(57)
2001
2828(63)
1695(37)
92(36)
167(64)
342(42)
477(58)
2002
999(39)
1581(61)
59(30)
141(70)
282(40)
429(60)
2003
2107(52)
1976(48)
124(35)
234(65)
605(51)
589(49)
total
39161(68)
18858(32)
3976(52)
3665(48)
23888(48)
25994(52)
0
2611
1257
265
244
1593
1733
s
1303
466
213
120
1668
1727


14
Figure 2.2. 5th/95th percentile boxplots of number otters harvested per parish in coastal (top)  and
upland (bottom) areas in Louisiana during 1984-2003. 


15
Figure 2.3. 5th/95th percentile boxplot for mean number of otters per trapper harvested in coastal
and upland parishes in Louisiana during 1984-2003.
No strong spatial autocorrelation was indicated by the scatterplot or Moran’s I coefficient
(Moran’s I = 0.2313), however, it is worth noting that most of the points in the upper right corner
and the lower left corner corresponded to coastal and upland parishes, respectively (Figure 2.6).
This indicates the presence of a certain degree of positive spatial autocorrelation, with coastal
parishes having, in general, higher mean number of otters harvested than the mean for the state,
and upland parishes having lower mean number of otters harvested. The scatterplot and Moran’s
I for number of otters per trapper which indicate the lack of spatial autocorrelation in this
variable (Moran’s I = 0.08); however, 2 points corresponding to St Bernard and Plaquemine
parishes were above the mean in terms of number of otters harvested per trapper (Figure 2.7).
Local Moran’s I statistic indicates the presence of hot and cold spots in terms of the 2
variables analyzed, mean number of otters and mean number of otters per trapper in each parish.
Two cold spots were identified based on number of otters harvested per parish, corresponding to 


16
Claiborne and Winn parishes, which had relatively fewer otters harvested than the neighboring
parishes. These 2 parishes are separated by a set of parishes forming a hot spot extending east-
west and formed by Madison, Richland, Ouachita, Jackson, Lincoln, Bienville, and Bossier
parish. Two other areas were identified as hot spots; one extending diagonally between the city
of Alexandria and the city of Lake Charles, and a second one corresponding to Assumption, St.
James, Ascension, and Livingston parish. Based on mean number of otters per trapper, one hot
spot was identified, corresponding to Jefferson Davis parish in southwestern Louisiana, and a
cold spot in the northeast part of the state (Madison parish; Figure 2.8).
Discussion
Changes have occurred in the last 20 years in the spatial dynamics of river otter harvest
in Louisiana, such as an increasing proportion of harvested otters coming from upland parishes
in more recent years, and an increase in the proportion of trappers catching otters in that region.
The migration of the weighted mean center is an indication of those changes. However,
considering the complexity of the system being studied, where ecological, social, political, and
economic issues play a role, determining which forces are responsible for those changes is not
possible with the data available at this time. As mentioned before, one goal in this study was to
identify patterns in the spatial dynamics of otter harvest in Louisiana, and generate working
hypotheses that could be used as starting points in a more integrated study of the dynamics of the
fur industry in Louisiana. 
Percentages of otters harvested in coastal and upland areas have changed during 1984-
2003 when compared to the period analyzed by Linscombe and Kinler (1985). Linscombe and
Kinler (1985) estimated that during 1977-1982, 85.6% and 14.4% of otters harvested were in
coastal and upland areas, respectively, whereas estimates for 1984-2004 indicate that 68% and
32% of the total number of otters were harvested in coastal and upland habitat, respectively.
Spatial analysis indicates that this shift in harvesting activity has been gradual rather than abrupt. 
Analysis supports the suggestion that a gradual shift in otter harvest distribution has
occurred over time, as shown by the increasing number of otters harvested in upland parishes in 


17
Table 2.2. Results from 2-proportion test comparing proportion between number of trappers that
caught at least one river otter and total number of licensed trappers in coastal and upland areas in
Louisiana during 1984-2003. Pcoast: proportion in coastal areas, Pupland: proportion in upland areas.
Trapping season
Pcoast
Pupland
Pcoast - Pupland
P-value
1984
0.14
0.04
0.1
<0.0001
1985
0.08
0.05
0.03
<0.0001
1986
0.11
0.07
0.04
<0.0001
1987
0.27
0.19
0.08
<0.0001
1988
0.20
0.12
0.08
<0.0001
1993
0.15
0.31
- 0.16
<0.0001
1994
0.29
0.35
- 0.06
0.052
1995
0.33
0.31
0.02
0.41
1996
0.26
0.28
- 0.02
0.55
1998
0.15
0.28
- 0.13
<0.0001
1999
0.16
0.23
- 0.07
0.005
2000
0.41
0.51
- 0.1
0.011
2001
0.27
0.35
- 0.08
0.012
2002
0.21
0.33
- 0.12 
<0.0001
2003
0.20
0.40
- 0.2
<0.0001


18
Figure 2.4. Coefficient of variation for number of otters (top) and harvesting ratio (bottom).
Louisiana trapping seasons 1984-2003.


19
*
Figure 2.5. Displacement of mean center weighted by number of otters harvested (light circles)
and harvesting rate (dark circles) in Louisiana during trapping seasons 1984-2003, 
(*) Unweighted mean center.


20
Figure 2.6. Moran’s scatterplot for mean number of otters harvested in Louisiana parishes
between 1984-2003. OMEAN stands for mean number of otters and W_OMEAN for weighted
mean number of otters. Moran’s I = 0.23


21
Figure 2.7. Scatterplot for number of otters harvested per trapper in Louisiana parishes during
1984-2003. OTMEAN stands for mean number of otters per trappers and W_OTMEAN
correspond to the weighted values. Moran’s I = 0.08


22
Figure 2.8. Local Moran’s I for mean number of otters per parish (top) and mean number of
otters per trapper (bottom)


23
more recent years and the displacement of the weighted mean center. Multiple, and likely
synergistic, mechanisms are potentially causal in the spatial changes observed in otter harvest. A
parsimonious explanation for this shift could be a greater interest of upland trappers in catching
otters because of increasing otter pelt price and a decline in pelt price for other furbearer species.
However, otter pelt price increases may fail to explain the gradual shift in otter harvest
distribution, because it is reasonable to assume that upland trappers would exhibit a generalized
interest in river otter pelts given its higher price and not a gradual, from south to north,  regional
change in attitude toward harvesting otters.
A second explanation for the gradual shift in otter harvesting distribution may be the
generalized coastal erosion process observed in Louisiana. Louisiana is experiencing the greatest
coastal erosion rates in the United States (Duke and Kruczynski 1992, Boesch et al. 1994),
which is characterized by the gradual conversion of coastal wetlands into open water habitat.
This gradual erosion could be causing a gradual and continuous reduction in otter habitat in
coastal areas, which may result in the migration and redistribution of otters in upland habitats.
Assuming that harvesting rate is trapper-dependent, and that pelt price of different
species has an impact on the attitude of the trapper toward a particular species, it is reasonable to
hypothesize that less skilled trappers would quit trapping activities, given the low price of pelts
in general, leaving the best trappers targeting otters. This decline in number of licensed trappers
has a twofold effect on the ratio of otter trappers/licensed trappers. The reduction of the
denominators will make the ratio larger, but it also would make the numerator larger considering
that a reduction in number of trappers has been attributed to increasing furbearer populations
through reductions in harvest (Lovell et al. 1998), which would contribute to increased
catchability given the higher abundance. This set of conditions would result in an upward trend
in the proportion of otter trappers/licensed trappers in upland areas in Louisiana.
I acknowledge that the processes causing these changes in otter harvest activity remain to
be identified, and that I offer speculative explanations. However,  these speculations provide a
baseline from which future otter research in Louisiana could develop questions and hypotheses


24
that need to be addressed if reliable management plans for river otter are to be developed in
Louisiana. Among those questions to be addressed are: Is there any change in trapper attitude
that may have led them to target river otters more now than in the past? Is there any trend in river
otter abundance in Louisiana? What is the status of coastal and upland populations? What is the
effect of coastal erosion on otter populations?
Given the importance of taking actions for the management of the species in the near
future, spatial associations in otter harvesting in Louisiana indicate that some preliminary steps
could be implemented until a more formal management plan for the species is developed. 
Besides the lack of a strong spatial autocorrelation, coastal parishes tend to produce more otter
pelts than the mean, whereas upland parishes tend to produce fewer pelts than the mean for the
state. Among the 4 marsh or lowland types defined in coastal areas (Linscombe and Kinler 1985)
the Inactive Delta of the Mississippi River appears to be the richest area in terms of otters
harvested per trapper. This area also is one of the regions presenting the highest percentage of
variation in both total number of otters harvested and otters per trapper (Figure 2.4), which
illustrates the magnitude of the dynamics in the area. The Southeast Swamp and the Atchafalaya
Basin also appear as highly dynamic regions in terms of variability .
Despite the relative lack of global spatial autocorrelation, Local Moran’s I identified
Jefferson Davis parish, in southwest Louisiana, and surrounding areas as a region with relatively
high harvesting rate. In northeast Louisiana, Madison parish was identified as an area with a
relatively lower value for otter per trapper than neighboring parishes. This result is largely the
consequence of Tensas parish having a higher harvesting rate (more than four times the ratio for
Madison parish). Considering that the harvesting rates used for the estimation of Local Moran’s I
were averages for 15 years, it could be assumed that differences between parishes in number of
otters per trapper is not the consequence of variability among trapper’s skills, and that other
variables are responsible for those differences. One factor that could be contributing to this trend
is the percentage of each type of land cover in the region. Three major protected areas are
present: Tensas National Wildlife Refuge and Big Lake Wildlife Management Area in Tensas


25
and Madison parish, and Buckhorn Wildlife Management Area in Tensas parish. Considering
that the dominant landcover for these parishes is agricultural land (Hartley et al. 2000), these
protected areas, which are forested wetlands, could provide primary habitat for otters in the
region (Chabreck et al. 1985). If there is a direct association between habitat availability and
river otter abundance, differences in harvesting rate could be explained by differences in habitat 
availability between Tensas and Madison parish since the largest fraction of Tensas National
Wildlife Refuge and Big Lake Wildlife Management Area are in Tensas parish.
Conversely, Jefferson Davis and surrounding parishes were identified as a hot spot based
on high harvesting rate. Again, habitat characteristics probably offer  the most reasonable
explanation, particularly considering the value of marshes and wetlands in coastal parishes like
Cameron and Vermillion, which has been recognized in other studies (Chabreck et al. 1985,
Linscombe and Kinler 1985). North of these coastal habitats are lands identified as agricultural
lands in the Gap analysis for Louisiana (Hartley et al. 2000), which mostly correspond to rice
fields (Anonymous 1997). Rice fields have been recognized as important surrogate habitat for
wildlife (Elphick 2000, 2004, Elphick and Oring 2003, Tourenq et al. 2001). River otters are
frequently found in these fields (Nair and Agoramoorthy 2002), where one important item in
their diet, the crawfish, is often grown as a companion crop with rice in Louisiana (Schueneman
2002).
Spatial analysis and results of otter harvesting data presented in this chapter indicates that
changes have occurred in this activity in the last 20 years in Louisiana. Conducting a survey
among trappers is important for the identification and understanding of the sources of those
changes. Coastal areas continue to be an important source for otter pelts, particularly the Inactive
Delta of the Mississippi River (Linscombe and Kinler 1985). However, the Chenier Plain in
western Louisiana also is an important habitat for otters, where the role of field rice as
alternative habitat for river otters remains to be studied. Results from this study also could be
indicative of the importance of protected areas for otters in upland parishes. Harvesting pressure 


26
in these areas should be evaluated since Wildlife Management Areas are most likely the only
reservoir of otters and source for dispersal in upland parishes.


27
CHAPTER 3
TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF RIVER OTTER HARVEST 
IN LOUISIANA DURING 1957-2004
It has been argued that achieving sustainable use of renewable resources is
difficult, particularly due to lack of consensus on resource status among researchers and
managers (Ludwig et al. 1993). Sustainable exploitation requires harvesting strategies that
maximize yield while accounting for stochastic dynamics, uncertainty, and risk of population
extinction. Considering that exploited populations are highly variable (Myers and Rothman
1995), the risk of depletion or extinction of small populations increases as a consequence of
demographic stochasticity arising from random events in individual mortality and reproduction
(May 1974). If sustainable use is to be achieved, managers must have information about
variables related to exploitation of the target resource.
In some exploited populations, harvesting is the most important source of mortality, and
it also could potentially affect the temporal dynamics of those populations (Jonzén et al. 2003).
Different harvesting strategies could modify the natural cycling patterns of exploited
populations, changing the periodicity and/or magnitude of variation in number of individuals
which may have important implications for the management of the species. When no data are
available on population dynamics of a harvested species, a description of the dynamics of
harvest through time and the ability to forecast number of animals to be harvested represent one
of the first steps toward the development of a formal management plan for that species.
River otter (Lontra canadensis) is among the most valued species in the fur market,
particularly in Louisiana, where otters have been an important furbearer species for almost a
century (St. Amant 1959). Because understanding temporal dynamics of river otter harvest has
potential far-reaching implications for river otter management and conservation, time series
analysis was used to describe temporal behavior of variables associated with river otter
harvesting, such as number of otters harvested, number of licensed trappers, and otter pelt price
during 1957-2004. The primary goal was to identify simple models to describe patterns and 


28
associations among variables mentioned above, and provide to state wildlife managers a tool to
forecast number of otters harvested several seasons in advance. 
Methods
I analyzed harvest data for river otter collected by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife
and Fisheries (LDWF) with a time series approach. Complete time series for 1957-2004 existed
for number of otters harvested (PELT), number of licensed trappers (LIC), and otter pelt price.
Series for the period 1957-2003 were used for all the analysis and model development, and data
from trapping season 2004 was used as an out-of-range sample for model forecast evaluation.
Time plots were used as preliminary descriptive tools to identify trends in the series and needed
transformation of the data. Nominal river otter pelt price (NPRICE) was adjusted by the
consumer price index (CPI) (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2004) to generate the real pelt price
(RPRICE), a pelt price adjusted by the cost of many of the major commodities a trapper needs to
buy. The relationship is given by RPRICE = NPRICE / CPI. Fifteen trapping seasons for the
period 1984-2003 also included number of licensed trappers that actually caught at least one
river otter. This data set was used to estimate number of otters captured per trapper for those
seasons.
Some Concepts and Nomenclature Used in Time Series Analysis
Time series analysis differs from other statistical problems in that the observed time
series is the unique sample of the process Xt that will ever be observed. An observation at time t,
namely xt, is considered as being an observation of the random variable Xt,, where the observed
time series is commonly named a realization of the stochastic process and the population of all
possible realizations is called the ensemble.  Much of the theory developed to analyze time series
assume stationarity. Formally, a stochastic process is said to be stationary if the mean, E[Xt], and
variance V[Xt] are constant for all values of t and  the covariance between Xt and Xt+k depends
only on the separation lag k and not on t. I identified non-stationary processes based on the
analysis of their sample autocorrelation function (sACF), and their spectrum density function
(Chatfield 2001). A time series was considered as representing a non-stationary process if its 


29
sACF approached zero very slowly with the lag (Wilson 2001). In the presence of a trend in a
time series, its spectral density function will show high values at low frequencies.
For an observed time series {x1, x2, ..., xn} the sample autocovariance coefficient at lag k
is calculated by 
                                              c
x
x x
x
n
k
t
t k
t
n k
=
−
−
+
=
−
∑
(
)(
) /
1
for k = 0, 1, 2, .... The sample autocorrelation coefficient at lag k can be calculated by
rk = ck / co
where rk represents the autocorrelation at lag k, ck is the covariance between observations at lag
k, and co is the variance. The graph of the sample autocorrelation coefficient rk against k (lag) is
called correlogram. Correlogram for each time series was used as descriptive tools, but also as
part of the procedure for identifying appropriate models. Another function is the partial
autocorrelation function (PACF) which essentially measures the correlation at lag k after
removing the effect of associations at lower lags (Gottman 1981). Sample ACF and sPACF were
used to identify plausible models.
Because the analysis of sACF is a subjective tool for the identification of stationarity, I
used formal statistical tests for stationarity detection in time series such as the Augmented
Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test (Brocklebank and Dickey 2003, Enders 2004) as an objective tool even
though it has been noted that this kind of test generally has poor power because the alternative
hypothesis is too ‘close’ to the null hypothesis, offering a small contribution to the task of
identifying stationarity and time series forecasting (Chatfield 2001).
The presence of autocorrelation imposes some problems for the analysis of time series.
Classical statistical methods have been developed to analyze data sets where the entries are
independent. However, these methods do not work well when correlation exists between
successive values in a time series. To describe the dynamics of number of otters harvested
through time, I used four different approaches within time series analysis, (i) regression analysis 


30
r
k
c
k
c
c
xy
xy
xx
yy
( )
( ) /
[
( )
( )]
=
0
0
(Ostrom 1990), (ii) linear autoregressive integrated moving-average models (ARIMA), (iii)
transfer function models, and (iv) spectral analysis.
Cross-correlation
To identify associations at different lags between number of pelts and trapper
participation, and between pelt price and number of pelts harvested I used cross-correlation
analysis. A sample cross-correlation function is given by
where rxy represents the correlation at lag k between time series x and y, cxy (k) provides an
estimate of the population cross-covariance coefficient, and cxx (0) and cyy (0) are the sample
variances of the observations on the x- and y-series, respectively. Since the cross-correlation
function is not an even function (i.e., correlation at lag k differs from correlation at lag -k), the
value of the lag which gives the maximum cross-correlation gives some indications on which
series is ‘leading’ the other (Chatfield 2001, Gottman 1981).
Regression Analysis
In time series regression analysis a structural equation in the form 
Yt = a + bXt + et
is used to describe the data. Yt represents the value of the response variable at time t, a and b
represent constant parameters,  Xt is the value of the explanatory variable at time t, and et
represents the error term. Writing a regression model assuming that successive values of e are
independent will produce a flawed model because it will ignore the temporal dependence among
the observed variables and among the error terms.
Because in time series the error terms et usually are autocorrelated, SAS PROC
AUTOREG (SAS Institute v 8.2) with parameter estimation using the Yule-Walker method  to
account for that autocorrelation and identify the structural equation was used to describe the
association between the response variable number of otter pelts at time t (PELTt) and the


31
explanatory variables number of pelts lagged 1 to 6 trapping seasons (PELTt-1 to PELTt-6),
number of licensed trappers at time t (LICt) and lagged up to 6 trapping seasons (LICt-1 to LICt-6),
and nominal pelt price at time t (NPRICEt) and also lagged 1 to 6 seasons (NPRICEt-1 to
NPRICEt-6). All these explanatory variables were entered in the model development step and
selected using backward variable selection in SAS PROC AUTOREG. 
ARIMA Models
ARIMA models (Box and Jenkins 1970) were used to describe and forecast time series
PELT, as an univariate series. In general, a model for a time series, Xt, can be formally stated as
Xt = f(Xt-1, ....., X1) + et 
where f(Xt-1, ....., X1) is a function of the past values of the series, to be determined from the data,
and et is a noise part. Since the systematic part f(Xt-1, ....., X1) depends on past values, it can be
forecasted. ARIMA models assume that the function  f  has a linear form that can be written as
f(Xt-1, ....., X1) = B1 Xt-1 + ...... + Bt-1 X1
and the basic idea of ARIMA models is to approximate a sequence of weights (B1, B2, ......) by
using a small number of parameters (Wilson 2001).
In ARIMA modeling methodology, a very flexible class of models is introduced in the
analysis, and one member of that class is fit to the time series, which also is the model used to
forecast the series. This methodology has 3 steps (i) identification of the model, (ii) estimation of
parameters, and (iii) forecasting. I used SAS PROC ARIMA to identify the set of plausible
models to describe the PELT time series. The Q-statistics (Box et al. 1994, Ljung and Box 1978)
in the identification stage generated by SAS PROC ARIMA using the autocorrelation
coefficients was used to test the null hypothesis that the series represented a purely random
process, i.e., that the process was uncorrelated or white noise. In the estimation stage this same
statistic is calculated on the model residuals, and was used to test the null hypothesis that these
residuals were white noise. Maximum likelihood method was used for parameter estimation.
Among all the models that showed residuals as white noise, which indicated a good fit of that
particular model to the data, the model that minimized the Akaike’s Information criterion (AIC)


32
was selected as the final model to describe the series and forecast number of pelts harvested one
trapping season in advance. Given the relatively small sample size, no test was performed on the
forecasting capability of different models (Chatfield 2001); however, I used the error for
trapping season 2004 as an indicator of the forecasting power of each model. This indicates that
as more data are collected the proposed model for forecasting should be revisited and adjusted to
new findings.
Transfer Function Models 
Transfer function models (Box and Jenkins 1970 see Chatfield 1980) were used to
forecast the time series PELT one trapping season ahead incorporating series LIC and NPRICE
as explanatory variables in the model. The general structure of this model is given by
Yt = v(B) Xt + nt
where v(B) = v0 + v1B + v2B + ...  is a polynomial in the backward shift operator, B (see Chatfield
2001 for details), and {nt} represents the error term. This analysis was performed using SAS
PROC ARIMA with maximum likelihood method for parameter estimation. 
Spectral Analysis
Spectral decomposition analysis (Gottan 1981, Wilson 2001) was used to identify the
existence of cycles and its period (p) in the time series PELT and LIC. This approach assumes
that the function f given above in the ARIMA model section can be represented as a sum of sine
and cosine waves.
The spectral decomposition theorem states that the variance of any time series can be
broken into the contribution of statistically independent oscillations of different frequencies. The
graph of variances accounted for by all the frequencies is called the spectral distribution
function; peaks in this graph indicate frequencies at which the largest variances occur. Sample
spectral functions were generated using SAS PROC SPECTRA. If time plots indicated change in
patterns or trends, spectral analysis was applied for the series before and after the trapping
season when the change occurred. Conversion between frequency freq and period p is given by 
p = (1/freq) 2B


33
Results
For comparison purposes, time plot for series pelt price (NPRICE) has been overlaid with
time plots for series number of pelts (PELT) and licensed trappers (LIC) (Figures 3.1, 3.2, see
Table 3.1). Time series PELT does not show a clear trend in the series when considered for the
whole period, whereas time series LIC, NPRICE, and RPRICE show different trends when
broken down into different time periods. The pelt price time series nominal and real price
(NPRICE and RPRICE, respectively) shows a decline in otter pelt price during the 1980s and an
increasing trend from the early 1990s until 2003 (Figure 3.3). The series LIC shows an
increasing trend before 1980, and a continuous decline since then.
Prewhitened time series LIC and NPRICE were cross-correlated with number of pelts
harvested to identify associations at different lags. Correlograms are presented in Figure 3.4. The
correlogram for number of licensed trappers series indicates that number of pelts at time t is
positively correlated with past number of trappers (significant positive correlation in positive
lags), whereas pelt price at time t is negatively associated with past number of otter pelts
harvested (significant negative correlation at positive lags).
Regression Analysis
The structural equation identified in time series regression analysis is
PELT t = 5700 + 0.7 (LIC t) - 0.43 (LIC t-5) - 0.39 (PELT t-5) + et
which indicates that the linear combination of number of licensed trappers at present time and
lagged 5 years, and number of pelts lagged 5 years as the explanatory variables explained 73%
(R2 = 0.727) of the variation in the number of otters harvested at time t. All coefficients were
significant at " = 0.05. The time series for actual and predicted number of pelts and the time plot
or the regression errors which indicates a good fit for the regression model (Figure 3.5).
The absence of conspicuous trends in the time plot of the PELT series, and the patterns shown by
the time plots for the LIC and NPRICE series were confirmed by their sACF and sPACF (Figure
3.6). This sACF for PELT declines very quickly, which is an indication of stationarity in 


34
the time series. The sACF for LIC and NPRICE shows a relatively slow decline, indicating
nonstationarity. 
The analysis of time plots and sACF and sPACF regarding stationarity was confirmed by
the ADF test, which indicated stationarity in the pelt time series (J = -3.65, P = 0.03 ), and
nonstationarity for LIC time series (J = -1.08, P = 0.92) and pelt price time series (J = -1.53, P =
0.80). Time series licensed trappers and pelt price were detrended by differencing (Chatfield
2001, Enders 2004). ADF tests for number of licenses and pelt price series (J = -5.55, P =
0.0002; J = -7.94, P = <0.0001, respectively), and their sACF, and sPACF (not shown) gave no
indication of thte presence of trends in the differenced time series.
ARIMA Models
Seven models were developed to describe the PELT series and evaluated based on the
analysis of its sACF and sPACF, a first-order autoregressive model AR(1), a fifth-order
autoregressive model with alternate parameters AR(1,5), a first-order moving averages model
MA(1), a fourth-order moving averages model MA(4), a fifth-order moving averages model
MA(5), and two mixed model ARMA (1,4) and ARMA (1,5). The MA(4), MA(5), and mixed
models were included in the analysis in an attempt to capture the almost significant peak
observed in the sPACF at lags 4-5. Table 3.2 shows parameter estimates, Q-statistics, and AIC
for all models with all parameter estimates significantly different from zero at " = 0.1 . 
The evaluation of AIC and Q-statistics, and significance of parameter estimates indicated
that the autoregressive models AR(1) and moving average model MA(4) performed similarly
well describing the time series. Model AR(1,5) had the lowest AIC, and for that reason it was
selected even though one of its parameter estimates was marginally nonsignificant. The
equations describing each model are:
AR(1):
PELTt = 5053 + 0.547 (PELTt-1 - 5053)
AR(1,5):
 PELTt = 5115 + 0.6 (PELTt-1 - 5115) - 0.26 (PELTt-5 - 5115)
MA(4):  
PELTt = 5173 + et + 0.45 et-1  + 0.43 et-2  + 0.4 et-3  + 0.35 et-4
where et,..., et-4 represent points of a random time series (for details see Gottman 1981).


35
Table 3.1. Number of otter pelts harvested, licensed trappers, otters per trappers who caught at
least one otter, and pelt price for the period 1957-2004 in Louisiana. (Source LDWF)
Trapping
season
Number of
pelts
Number licensed
trappers
Number of otter
per trappers
Pelt price
(U$)
1957
5261
4211
-
16
1958
4382
3868
-
14
1959
5166
3932
-
14
1960
5559
3743
-
18
1961
3602
3613
-
17
1962
4195
3004
-
16
1963
8484
3666
-
17
1964
4274
3029
-
18
1965
3288
3061
-
25
1966
3588
3088
-
20
1967
4118
3492
-
18
1968
3466
2495
-
14
1969
5426
3601
-
20
1970
6632
4444
-
23
1971
4808
3510
-
25
1972
5440
2761
-
38
1973
7668
4741
-
42
1974
5989
6295
-
30
1975
6113
7528
-
25
1976
5730
6404
-
25
1977
11900
9329
-
45
1978
6597
12069
-
25
1979
9745
11106
-
35
1980
9324
12239
-
40
1981
10411
11801
-
26
1982
5905
10867
-
22
1983
3126
10668
-
13.5


36
Table 3.1. (cont.).
Trapping
season
Number of
pelts
Number licensed
trappers
Number of otter
per trappers
Pelt price
(U$)
1984
4122
8793
3.85
12
1985
5727
10935
5.41
12
1986
3529
9458
3.82
10
1987
5074
6947
3.41
12
1988
4021
5038
3.19
12.4
1989
1924
2888
-
10
1990
1365
1877
-
12
1991
1203
1414
-
12
1992
1779
1543
-
16
1993
1983
1189
9.73
16.6
1994
4063
1274
9.18
30
1995
6418
1686
9.88
30
1996
7555
1700
16.05
26.4
1997
5649
2691
-
25
1998
7200
2442
7.18
28.45
1999
2483
1578
8.95
27.2
2000
2872
1024
10.31
37.3
2001
4593
987
20.73
33
2002
2579
871
15.83
50
2003
3932
1589
11.61
59.1
2004
5713
1432
-
86


37
Figure 3.1. Time plot of number of otter pelts harvested (continuous line) and otter pelt price
(dashed line) in Louisiana during trapping seasons 1957-2003. (Source: Louisiana Department of
Wildlife and Fisheries)
Figure 3.2. Time plot of number of licensed trappers (continuous line) and pelt price (dashed
line) in Louisiana during trapping seasons 1957-2003.(Source: Louisiana Department of Wildlife
and Fisheries)


38
Figure 3.3. Nominal (continuous line) and real (dashed line) otter pelt price paid in Louisiana
during 1957-2003. (Source: Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries)


39
a)
b)
c)
Figure 3.4. Cross-correlogram for number of otter pelts harvested in Louisiana during 1957-2003
and number of licensed trappers (a) and nominal pelt price (b). Diagram c represents correlogram
between number of licensed trappers and pelt price. Dashed lines indicate estimated 95%
confidence interval. k :lag, rk = correlation coefficient at lag k


40
Figure 3.5. Actual (continuous line) and predicted (dashed line)  number of otter pelts harvested
in Louisiana during 1957-2003 (top) and time plot of errors from time series regression (bottom)


41
Figure 3.6. Sample autocorrelation function (sACF) (left) and sample partial autocorrelation
function (sPACF) (right) for time series number of otter pelts harvested (top), number of licensed
trappers (center), and otter pelt price (bottom) in Louisiana during 1957-2003. Dashed lines
indicate 95% confidence interval, k represents lag, and rk correlation coefficient at lag k.


42
Even though parsimony indicates that model AR(1) should be selected over models
AR(1,5) and MA(4), the three models were used to forecast trapping season 2004, where actual
number of pelts harvested was 5713. Figure 3.7 shows the last five trapping seasons of this time
series, including season 2004, and forecasted values for this last season using the selected
models. Forecasted number of pelts, error values, and 95% confidence intervals are presented in
Table 3.3.
Transfer Function Models
Twelve models were evaluated based on the sACF and sPACF of the PELT series (Figure
3.6) using LIC as the only regressor, and the same models were evaluated including both LIC
and NPRICE as regressors. The models were AR(1), AR(1,5), AR(2), MA(1), MA(2), MA(3),
MA(4), MA(5), ARMA(1,1), ARMA(1,2), ARMA(1,4), and ARMA(1,5). Information for
models with all parameter estimates significantly different from zero at " = 0.1 are presented in
Table 3.4. Based on their AIC, transfer function, model AR(1) with LIC and with LIC and
NPRICE as regressors, and model MA(3) with both regressors were selected to forecast the
PELT series. Forecast for number of pelt in trapping season 2004 and errors for these 3 models
are presented in Table 3.5. Equations for AR(1) models are
AR(1): 5057 + 0.49 (PELTt-1 - 5057) - 0.59 LLIC 
AR(1): 4973 + 0.57 (PELTt-1 - 4973) - 0.56 LLIC - 61.57 LNPRICE
where LLIC and LNPRICE represent the first difference of the series LIC and NPRICE,
respectively (for details see Chatfield 2001). 
Given the changes observed in the time series number of licenses in the mid-80s, spectral
analysis was performed for series number of pelts and licenses before and after trapping season
1983 to test for the presence of the same cycles before and after the change in trend in the
licenses time series. Although the sample spectral density function for number of licenses did not
show any peaks (Figure 3.7), indicating no cycles, number of pelts series showed peaks  
before and after the 1983 trapping season (Figure 3.8). Before season 1983 the peak at
frequencies 0.6383 indicates the presence of cycles at 10-year periods. Spectral analysis for the


43
series after 1983 indicates the presence of 2 well defined cycles with 9-year and 3.4-year periods 
(frequencies 0.6981 and 1.8617, respectively). A third peak appears in the number of pelts series
after 1984 at frequency 1.3963 (period = 6.28).
Table 3.2. ARIMA model comparison for time series PELT.
Model
parameter 
estimate
p-value
Q-statistic
d.f
p-value
AIC
AR(1)
AR 1,1:
0.54
<0.001
Q lag 6
Q lag 12
Q lag 18
5.27
11.89
17.20
5
11
17
0.38
0.37
0.44
850
AR(1,5)
AR 1,1:
AR 1,5:
0.6
-0.26
<0.001
0.11
Q lag 6
Q lag 12
Q lag 18
3.08
6.84
11.74
4
10
16
0.54
0.74
0.76
849
MA(1)
MA 1,1:
-0.39
<0.05
Q lag 6
Q lag 12
Q lag 18
11.44
18.71
25.86
5
11
17
0.04
0.06
0.07
855
MA(4)
MA 1,1:
MA 1,2:
MA 1,3:
MA 1,4:
-0.45
-0.43
-0.39
-0.35
<0.05
<0.05
<0.05
<0.05
Q lag 6
Q lag 12
Q lag 18
0.25
5.05
11.32
2
8
14
0.88
0.75
0.66
850
Table 3.3. Forecasted values of number of pelts harvested, errors and 95% confidence interval
for number of otters pelts harvested in trapping season 2004 in Louisiana using selected ARIMA
models.
Model
forecast
95% CI
error
AR(1)
4439
(526 , 8353)
1274
AR(1,5)
5415
(1570 , 9261)
298
MA(4)
5006
(1192 , 8819)
707


44
Discussion
The international fur trade market suffered a significant transformation in the mid-80s
with the rise of the Animal Rights Movement (Finsen and Finsen 1994). This transformation is
clearly reflected in the time plot for LIC time series, which shows a downward trend in number
of licensed trappers since that time in Louisiana. This trend also is evident in the sample spectral
density function for that series, as indicated by the high values at low frequencies. The
downward trend in number of trappers in Louisiana is concurrent with a nationwide decline in
number of people involved in furbearer trapping, which has been related to lack of trapper
recruitment, a general decline in pelt prices among all furbearer species, and an increase in anti-
trapping sentiment (Armstrong and Rossi 2000). 
The time plot for nominal and real pelt price shows that otter fur had a greater real value
before the 1980s than it has now, and although the nominal price has been increasing for the last
15-18 years, the real price does not represent for the trappers what it did in the early 1970s, when
each pelt was worth twice as much as it was in 2003 for the trapper’s economy. Nevertheless, the
stationarity observed in the time series PELT in Louisiana during 1957-2003 could be a
consequence of the relatively high value of river otter pelts in the fur market. This relatively high
value of otter pelts compared to other furbearer species in Louisiana (St. Amant 1957,
Linscombe and Kinler 1985) could have led active trappers to target this species more in recent
years, which also could explain the increase in number of otters harvested per trapper. Thus, a
change in trapper attitude could be why number of pelts harvested has remained relatively stable,
even though number of trappers has been declining during the last 20-25 years.
A decline in number of trappers could lead to an increase in abundance of furbearer
species (Caughley 1977), but with no data available on trapping effort for Louisiana, it is unclear
whether the stationarity in number of pelts harvested is consequence of an increase in the 
abundance of otters with no changes in harvesting effort, or due to a renewed interest of trappers
in river otters considering the sustained high price of otter pelts compared to other furbearer
species. Regardless, it seems reasonable to assume that the dramatic decline in number of 


45
Table 3.4. Transfer function models for time series PELT: parameter estimates,  Q-statistics, and
AIC for selected models using time series LIC as the only regressor, and LIC and NPRICE as
regressors.
model
parameter 
estimate
p-value
Q
d.f
p-value
AIC
AR(1)
intercept (lag 0)
PELT (lag 1)
LIC (lag 0)
NPRICE (lag 0)
4973
0.57
0.56
61.57
<0.001
<0.001
0.01
0.04
Q lag 6:
Q lag 12:
Q lag 18:
5.27
11.89
17.20
5
11
17
0.81
0.87
0.70
826.61
MA(1)
intercept (lag 0)
PELT (lag 1)
LIC (lag 0)
NPRICE (lag 0)
5034
-0.46
0.64
65.44
<0.001 
<0.01
0.0075
0.0501
Q lag 6:
Q lag 12:
Q lag 18:
7.02
10.84
18.37
5
11
17
0.21
0.46
0.37
831.84
MA(3)
intercept (lag 0)
PELT (lag 1)
PELT (lag 2)
PELT (lag 3)
LIC (lag 0)
NPRICE (lag 0)
4993
-0.48
-0.37
-0.39
0.71
75
<0.001
0.001
0.018
0.012
0.001
0.001
Q lag 6:
Q lag 12:
Q lag 18:
0.27
3.08
7.9
3
9
15
0.96
0.96
0.93
827.88
AR(1)
intercept (lag 0)
PELT (lag 1)
LIC (lag 0)
5057
0.49
0.59
<0.001
<0.001
0.01
Q lag 6:
Q lag 12:
Q lag 18:
2.78
6.98
15.18
5
11
17
0.73
0.80
0.58
828.55
MA(1)
intercept (lag 0)
PELT (lag 1)
LIC (lag 0)
5097
-0.33
0.71
<0.001
0.025
0.0063
Q lag 6:
Q lag 12:
Q lag 18:
6.55
11.89
21.05
5
11
17
0.25
0.37
0.22
832.77
MA(2)
intercept (lag 0)
PELT (lag 1)
PELT (lag 2)
LIC (lag 0)
5063
-0.36
-0.29
0.70
<0.001
0.022
0.061
0.005
Q lag 6:
Q lag 12:
Q lag 18:
2.7
8.58
16.8
4
10
16
0.61
0.57
0.40
830.55
MA(3)
intercept (lag 0)
PELT (lag 1)
PELT (lag 2)
PELT (lag 3)
LIC (lag 0)
5071
-0.35
-0.34
-0.25
0.67
<0.001
0.02
0.02
0.10
0.005
Q lag 6:
Q lag 12:
Q lag 18:
1.33
5.98
13.00
3
9
15
0.72
0.74
0.60
830.44
Table 3.5. Forecasted values of number of pelts harvested, errors and 95% confidence interval
for number of otters pelts harvested in trapping season 2004 in Louisiana using selected transfer
function models.(*) AR(1) model with only LIC time series as regressor.
model
forecast
95% CI
error
AR(1)
5398
(1782 , 9015)
315
MA(3)
5822
(2237 , 9408)
109
*AR(1)
4204
(468 , 7938)
1509


46
licensed trappers must have positively affected abundance of river otters in Louisiana at some
level, independently of whether active trappers have an increased interest in the species in recent
years.
Cross-correlation analysis identified associations existing between number of pelts, and
number of licenses and pelt price. As mentioned before, the significant positive correlation at
positive lags in Figure 3.4a indicates that the present number of licensed trappers is correlated to
past number of pelts harvested. This suggests that the PELT time series leads the LIC time series,
and that any changes in the PELT series will be followed by changes in the same direction in the
LIC series. This association could be explained assuming that a string of successful or
unsuccessful trapping seasons could encourage new people to participate or quit trapping
activities during the  next few trapping seasons (Berryman 1991). Cross-correlation also
indicates that the association between number of pelts and pelt price could be purely
contemporaneous, meaning that no time series lead the other, and that the average pelt price paid
in any of the previous trapping season does not have an effect on the number of pelts harvested
during present or future trapping seasons. 
This non-effect of pelt price on future number of pelts harvested agrees with the well
studied time series representing lynx fur returns from the Hudson’s Bay Company (Brand and
Keith 1979, Royama 1992). The correlogram representing the association between pelt price and
number of licensed trappers (Figure 3.4c) indicated that changes in pelt price may positively
affect future number of licensed trappers. Notably, the correlogram showed 2 peaks, one at lag -1
and another at lag -6. Some authors have suggested that beaver pelt price may have some effect
of trapper participation in the following trapping season (Runge 1999). However this study fails
to demonstrate the existence of a similar effect between otter pelt price and number of licensed
trappers in the next trapping season (lag -1). While the cross-correlation coefficient at lag -6 was
significant, it was relatively weak (r<0.4), and because it seems very difficult to identify a
process that could relate present number of licensed trappers to otter pelt price 6 years ago, it is
likely a random occurrence.


47
Figure 3.7. Estimated spectral density function. Trapping licenses time series for 1957-1983
(top) and 1984-2003 (bottom)


48
Figure 3.8. Estimated spectral density function. Pelts time series for 1957-1983 (top) and 1984-
2003 (bottom)


49
Five of the 12 models selected, the regression equation, the AR(1,5) and MA(4) among
the ARIMA models, and the two MA(3) models from the transfer function model family, share
some significant characteristics that warrant discussion. Regression analysis indicated that
number of trappers and otters harvested five years prior have a negative effect on number of
otters trapped at present time. Similar effects of past trapping seasons at variable negative lags
are indicated by the ARIMA and transfer function model development (MA(4) and MA(3)
models respectively), which show negative parameter estimates for the lagged PELT time series.
Reproductive biology of river otters in southern populations could offer a biological
interpretation for the inclusion of those lagged terms in the models.
Latitude has been identified as having an effect on the age at which river otters achieve
sexual maturity, and although individuals from southern populations could be sexually mature at
18-24 months of age (Melquist et al. 2003), males may not reach the full status of breeders until
they are 5-8 years old (Liers 1951). If we consider that for many species reproductive males
exhibit higher catchability, reflecting intense sexual activity (Lourdais et al. 2002), it seems
reasonable to hypothesize that removing a certain number of reproductively active male otters
could have an impact on size of the harvestable population 4-5 years later. This seems a
plausible scenario in Louisiana, where more than 60% of the harvested otters in the trapping
seasons 2002 and 2003 were aged as young adult males (2-3 years old) based on tooth ware
pattern (unpublished data).
The selected models including lagged terms and the lagged cross-correlation between
number of trappers and pelts agree with the existence of 3-4 year period cycles indicated by the
spectral density function for the PELT series during 1984-2003. Relationships between number
of harvested individuals and the effect of harvesting pressure have been synthesized by the
Economic-Ecological feedback loop model developed for the cyclic dynamics in catch records of
Dungeness crabs (Berryman 1991). This model relates the cyclic dynamics to the response of
fishery to previous harvest success by modifying direct and indirect mortality rates in the crab
population.


50
Other authors also have suggested that cycles in wild populations could be a consequence
of harvesting pressure (Jonzén et al. 2003). Considering that this 3-4 year peak was evident only
from 1984 to 2003 and not before, it could be hypothesized that the reason why this peak did not
appear during 1957-1983 is because a more intense interaction between otter populations and
harvesting activities existed during 1984-2003. Specifically, trappers during 1957-1983 targeted
other furbearer species besides river otters, but after the profound changes in the fur market in
the mid-80s, river otters became a more targetable furbearer species because the value of its fur
remained relatively high.
There are reasons to believe that there is certain variability in the 3-4 year cycle. Of note
is that sharpness of the peak is related to sample size and variability in periodicity. Peaks in the
sample spectral function are commonly wider than 1/n, indicating that the cycle associated with
that peak is irregular in some way, which implies that its phase, amplitude, or frequency could
change. This variation is shown by the different frequency at which the sample spectral density
diagrams for number of pelts peak, variation that also is reflected by the inclusion of different
lags in the regression equation (lag 5) and the moving average models. The presence of a 10-year
cycle in the pelt time series before and after 1983 could indicate that this cycle is not a
consequence of harvesting activities, but rather of intrinsic population processes (see chapter 4). 
Many considerations are required to select the appropriate model to be used as a
forecasting tool by state managers. Model MA(3) with LIC and NPRICE as regressors in the
transfer function family showed the smallest error; however, this model requires the present
number of licensed trappers and pelt price to forecast number of pelts, and these values are
usually only available at the end of each season. For that reason, this model may not represent a
suitable tool for managers who are interested in estimating number of otter pelts harvested at the
beginning of the trapping season. Fortunately, ARIMA model AR(1,5) had a similar
performance and does not require values from the present trapping season to forecast. The
equation that describes this model and that could be used by state wildlife managers to forecast
number of pelts is:  PELTt = mean + 0.6 (PLETt-1 - mean)  - 0.26 (PELTt-5 - mean) + error


51
When more data are available, new analyses will have to be conducted to re-evaluate this
model and adapt it to new findings. Future research on the ecology and dynamics of otters in
Louisiana will further contribute to the performance of this model.


52
CHAPTER 4
RIVER OTTER PELTS TIME SERIES AND 
ITS BIOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION 
For more than 60 years, the analysis of the time series representing fur-return for
Canadian lynx (Lynxs canadensis), has been at the core of attempts to understand cyclic
populations (Elton and Nicholson 1942, Royama 1992). This time series represents records kept
by the Hudson’s Bay Company of number of lynx pelts harvested in Canadian territories during
1821-1939. First analyzed in 1942 (Elton and Nicholson in 1942), the series continues to be a
source of debate and new models in population dynamics (Moran 1953a, 1953b, Tong 1977,
Haggan and Ozaki 1981, Royama 1992).
Many authors have criticized the assumption that fur-return statistics legitimately
represented actual abundance of lynx populations, arguing that cycles in the lynx fur-return time
series were the consequence of changes in trapper effort responding to variations in snowshoe
hare abundance (Gilpin 1973, Weinstein 1977, Winterhalder 1980) and not actual fluctuations in
lynx populations. But recent field data (Nellis et al. 1972, Brand et al. 1976, Brand and Keith
1979) and theoretical evidence (Royama 1992, Cattadori et al. 2003) support the use of harvest
data as indirect measures of population abundance. Notably, for many species harvest data are
the only source of information available, and some of the most revealing studies on population
dynamics have used harvest data (Elton and Nicholson 1942, Moran 1952, 1953, Botsford et al.
1983, Hankin 1985, Berryman 1991, Royama 1992).
The statistical analysis of time series has several strengths, such as a quantitatively
defined notion of goodness of fit, a good understanding of sampling properties of the statistics,
and few assumptions about the data (Kendall et al. 1999). However, although statistically sound,
processes governing the series are ignored in this approach (Kendall et al. 1999, Turchin 2003).
At the other end of the spectrum are the mechanistic models. Although lacking some quantitative
rigor, they improve our understanding of processes generating the cycles by explicitly including
in the modeling process factors controlling the dynamics, and also by considering available
information on the dynamic besides the information given by the time series (Kendall et al.


53
1999). Most models lie between these two extremes, depending on the knowledge of the species
being modeled. 
Few studies have used a combination of these two approaches, and one of those is the
description of the lynx cycles based on the fur-return time series by Royama (1992). Some
authors used a second-order autoregressive model AR(2) to describe these same data (Moran
1953, Royama 1992), whereas a more realistic model incorporates the dynamics of the lynx prey,
the snowshoe hare, in a predator-prey mechanistic model (Royama 1992).
The goal for this chapter is to develop a model that would describe the dynamics of the
river otter population in Louisiana. Rather than an accurate representation of these dynamics, the
model developed in this chapter has to be considered an intellectual tool that could be used by
local management and conservation agencies to define and understand problems related to river
otter populations, to understand data, to test hypotheses, and make predictions.
Methods
A basic assumption of this chapter is that the structure of the pelt time series reflects the
structure of the dynamics of the actual river otter populations. Two elements of the structure of
the pelt time series that were identified in Chapter 3 are considered for the development of the
population model, i) the effect of number of otters (or pelts in Chapter 3) at times t-1 and t-5 on
the number of otters (or pelts) at time t0., and ii) the periodic oscillations identified by the
spectral analysis.
Oscillations have been recognized in many animal populations (Kendall et al. 1999).
Moran (1953a) used an autoregressive model with periodic perturbations to describe the lynx
cycle. A simple model of time series using sinusoidal components could be represented by
Yt = : + " (sin(ot + *)) + gt 
where : represents the mean of the time series Y, " represents the amplitude of the wave, o is
the frequency, * is the phase of the wave, and gt describes a random effect.
Using the structure described by the ARIMA model AR(1,5) presented in Chapter 3, and
information from the spectral analysis of the time series, an autoregressive model with periodic


54
perturbations was developed to describe cyclic dynamics in the otter population. The
combination of the sinusoidal model and the AR(1,5) model gives
Yt = : + [(Yt-1 + 8Yt-5] + " (sin(ot + *)) + gt 
where the terms between brackets describe the autoregressive effect.
To start running the simulations with this model, population estimates for t-1 and t-5 are
needed. In coastal Louisiana, the harvest rate was estimated from 17-28% during 1973-1984
(Shirley et al. 1988). Considering that no trend was identified in the pelt time series in Chapter 3,
and it has been estimated that stability of river otter populations could be maintained with a
harvest of 15-17% of the available autumn population (Berg and Kuehn cited by Melquist et al.
2003), a mean harvest rate of 22% was used to estimate otter abundance in Louisiana during
1973-1984. The estimated abundances were used to simulate otter abundance for 1985-2008 with
the model
OTTERt = 073-84 + 0.6 (OTTERt-1 - 073-84) - 0.23 (OTTERt-5 - 073-84) + 
      + 073-84 " sin[(t - 1977) 2B/P1] - 073-84 " sin[(t -1977) 2B/P2]
where OTTERt is the number of otters at time t, 073-84 represents the estimated mean number of
river otters during 1973-1984, OTTERt-1 and OTTERt-5 are the number of otters at time t-1 and t-
5, respectively, " is the amplitude, t is the time (year) at which otter abundance will be
estimated, and  P1 and P2 are 2 different periods of the oscillation. Simulations were generated
with " = 0.18 and 0.22, P1 = 8, 9 and 10 years, and P2 = 4 and 5 years. Software MAPLE v.9.5
was used for all the simulations (Waterloo Maple Inc. 2005). Models giving the best
correspondence with the harvest data, in terms of year at which peaks and troughs occurs, during
1973-2003 were considered good approximations to the otter population dynamics.
Results
A total of six simulations were generated with the following combination of parameters, 
sim1: " = 0.22 , P1 = 10 , P2 = 5
sim2: " = 0.18, P1 = 10 , P2 = 5
sim3: " = 0.22, P1 = 9 , P2 = 4.5
sim4: " = 0.18, P1 = 9 , P2 = 4.5
sim5: " = 0.22, P1 = 8 , P2 = 4
sim6: " = 0.18, P1 = 8 , P2 = 4


55
Population estimates for the 12 years used to initiate the simulations and harvest data
during 1973-2003 indicated that not all simulations showed a good approximation to the
oscillations observed in the harvest data (Figures 4.1- 4.4). Simulations with periods P1 = 8 and
P2 = 4 gave the best correspondence with the peaks and troughs in the harvest data (Figure 4.4).
Discussion
A basic assumption in the analysis presented in this chapter was that there is a
correspondence between patterns in time series of harvest data and ecological mechanisms 
generating population fluctuations. The analysis of the time plots comparing the occurrence of
peaks and troughs in the modeled populations and the harvest data suggested that the structure of 
the model with P1 = 8 and P2 = 4 may offer a reasonable approximation to the actual cyclic
dynamics of otter populations in Louisiana. As suggested by the spectral analysis in Chapter 3, 2
cyclic patterns with different periods were very likely to occur in the river otter population. This
analysis also indicated certain variability in the periodicity of these cycles. The model presented
in this chapter suggests that river otter populations in Louisiana may have cyclic dynamics with
8-year and 4-year periods. As discussed in Chapter 3, the 4-year period cycle could be explained
by a disproportionate catch of juvenile males. However, the biological explanation of the 8-year
period cycle is difficult given the current knowledge of the processes governing the dynamics of
otter populations. The actual magnitude of the amplitude of the oscillation remains unclear, and
may require additional data and analysis for its proper estimation.
It has been noted that harvest data seemed to exaggerate the cyclic changes in a
population. For instance, for the Canadian lynx data, it was estimated that the population
increased 4.3-fold over 5 years, whereas the harvest data showed a 20-fold increase for the same
period (Brant and Keith 1979, Royama 1992). An estimate of the probable maximum average
rate of increase for lynx was estimated as not being higher than 1.57 (or 57%). The same rate can
be estimated for river otters based on information of its reproductive biology with the equation
(Paf) (PR) (ULS) (Sp) + (Sa)


56
Figure 4.1. Number of harvested otter pelts (dashed line) in Louisiana during 1973-1984, and
estimated number of otters (solid line) for the same period based on an estimated mean harvest
rate of 22%.


57
Figure 4.2. Simulation of river otter population dynamics (continuous lines) for period 1973-
2008. Parameters were: amplitude = 0.22 (thick line), and 0.18 (thin line), both simulations used
the same periods, P1 = 10 years and P2 = 5 years. Dashed line represents number of river otters
harvested during 1973-2003. 


58
Figure 4.3. Simulation of river otter population dynamics (continuous lines) for period 1973-
2008. Parameters were: amplitude = 0.22 (thick line), and 0.18 (thin line), both simulations used
the same periods, P1 = 9 years and P2 = 4.5 years. Dashed line represents number of river otters
harvested during 1973-2003. 


59
Figure 4.4. Simulation of river otter population dynamics (continuous lines) for period 1973-
2008. Parameters were: amplitude = 0.22 (thick line), and 0.18 (thin line), both simulations used
the same periods, P1 = 8 years and P2 = 4 years. Dashed line represents number of river otters
harvested during 1973-2003. 


60
where Paf is the proportion of adult females in the population, PR is the pregnancy rate, ULS is
the in utero litter size, Sp is the survival of pups, and Sa is the survival of adults. 
A literature review indicated that proportion of adult females in a population has been
estimated as 50% (Lizotte 1994); pregnancy rate for otters as 0.88 (Lizotte 1994), in utero
average litter size has been reported to be 2.6 fetuses (Lizotte 1994), and survival was 0.87 for
pups and 0.75 for adults (Melquist and Hornocker 1983 ). These data suggest that the maximum
average rate of river otter population increase could not be much higher than 1.74 (or 74%);
however, harvest data indicate a 6.3-fold  increase during 1991-1996, more than 3 times the
estimated maximum rate of increase for the population.
Different factors have been identified as potentially causing the discrepancy between
harvest data and population estimates: trap bias, sampling error, and trapper’s effort. As
mentioned in Chapter 3, juvenile males are more likely to be caught (Lourdais et al. 2002),
which may contribute to the exaggerated amplitude. Sampling error is believed to be low given
the regulations imposed by the LDWF and the possession tags needed for otter pelt
commercialization. Trappers and fur dealers have to report their catch to LDWF  to get the
possession tags and be able to commercialize otter pelts. Another possible cause of the
exaggerated amplitude in the harvest data could be trapper effort. Higher pelt price may lead
trappers to spend more time/traps trying to catch otters. However time series analysis presented
in Chapter 3 does not support this argument. Furthermore, it has been suggested that otters in
Louisiana may be taken in traps set for other furbearer species (Edwards 1983), which not only
discounts the argument of trapper effort as a source of exaggerated amplitudes, but also supports
the assumption that changes in harvest data indicate actual changes in otter population. Updated
information on trapper activities is needed for a better understanding of the associations between
harvest data and trapper effort. At the time of writing legal issues did not allow a trapper survey
to be conducted, making it impossible to discuss this topic with solid data.
Although the model presented in this chapter does not provide insight into the ecological
mechanisms responsible for the population dynamics, it still could represent a valuable tool for


61
state management and conservation agencies in their attempt to manage river otters in Louisiana.
Being a purely phenomenological model, the next steps should be to collect the needed
information for the development of a model with a mechanistic approach such as age and sex
structure, and make the arrangements to conduct a trapper’s survey that could provide insight on
the actual processes governing otter harvest and population dynamics in Louisiana.


62
CHAPTER 5
RIVER OTTER AS AN INDICATOR SPECIES OF 
WATER QUALITY IN LOUISIANA
With power plants as its main source, elemental mercury (Hg) is efficiently transported
as a gas around the globe, resulting in the contamination of areas far away from pollution
sources. By microbial activity, the inorganic form is methylated and enters the biota where it is
accumulated by organisms at various levels of the food chain. This organic form has been
detected in many remote lakes and streams in the United States, resulting in fish containing
mercury levels that posed health risks for human consumption (Swain et al. 1992). 
Fishing and fish consumption are very popular in Louisiana and for that reason, the
Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LDEQ) developed a program to monitor
mercury levels in all popular public-fishing areas in the state by sampling fish, water, and
sediments, and identifying water bodies of concern if mercury levels in fish were 0.5 ppm (parts
per million) or higher (LDEQ 2003). Although LDEQ has approximately 400 sites on file that
are regularly sampled (LDEQ 2003), that number may not be large enough to estimate the actual
status of many water bodies in Louisiana, as almost 17,000 miles of stream are distributed
among 2014 mappable systems (Louisiana GIS CD v.2.0.). Furthermore, considering that all
efforts are concentrated on popular public-fishing areas, a large proportion of small streams in
rural areas, where locals tend to catch their fish, may not be currently monitored. 
Including rural streams in the regular LDEQ’s sampling schedule may involve some
logistic constraints, such as limited human resources available to collect samples, and
geomorphological and hydrological characteristics of these streams that could make fish
sampling very difficult. For instance, no fishes were collected during preliminary field activities
of this study in areas where local people were known to fish after sampling 10 streams.
Electrofishing, a standard technique used in fish sampling by LDEQ, was used during the
sampling. Alternative ways to better monitor mercury levels in fish in Louisiana are needed if
areas with low fishing activity are to be included. One approach would be finding a surrogate 


63
species that is included in the same food chain as the fish community, that occurs in those
secondary streams, and that is available in numbers that would offer a valid sample size.
Many intrinsic and extrinsic characteristics of river otters indicate that this species could
be a suitable surrogate species to identify areas of concern in Louisiana regarding mercury levels
in fish. River otters bioconcentrate, bioaccumulate, and biomagnify mercury, three processes that
put otters at the top of the list of potential candidate species to be used as a monitor of aquatic
ecosystems. Bioconcentration is the net accumulation of a substance by an aquatic organisms as
a result of uptake directly from aqueous solution (Suter 1993, ASTM 1998). In contrast,
bioaccumulation represents the net accumulation of a substance by an organism as a result of
uptake directly from all environmental sources and as a result of uptake from all routes of
exposure (Connell 1990, Suter 1993, ASTM 1998). Bioaccumulation often refers to the process
by which a chemical moves into the organism from the food or water it ingested. Finally,
biomagnification is the increase in tissue concentration of poorly depurated materials in
organisms along a series of predator-prey associations, primarily through the mechanism of
dietary accumulation (ASTM 1998). Thus the processes of bioconcentration and
bioaccumulation make river otter a suitable species to monitor mercury concentration in aquatic
ecosystems, and since otters also may biomagnify mercury, measuring mercury levels in otters
offers the possibility of early detection of areas of concern. 
Such a monitoring program based on river otters could be an option for Louisiana
considering the species has a statewide distribution (Lowery 1974), normally inhabits areas with
low human activity (Chabreck et al. 1985), and that 3,500 otters are harvested on average per
year (Linscombe and Kinler 1985). In this chapter, different components that would be important
for the development of the final program are evaluated, such as feasibility of sample collection in
terms of numbers and origin of the samples, comparison of mercury levels in river otters and
fish, and tools for detection of areas of concern. Furthermore, because historic data on mercury
levels on river otter existed for the Atchafalaya Basin area (Beck 1977), a comparison of 


64
those levels to current values is presented as a way to estimate changes in aquatic systems in the
area through time.
Methods
Local fur dealers were contacted in 2002 and asked to collect otter carcasses from
trappers. Whole carcasses were kept frozen at the dealer’s facilities and collected for analysis
every 2-3 weeks. Every carcass was marked with a tag describing date of the catch and location,
which in most cases included stream name and the name of some landmark close to the catch
site. The decision to contact dealers and not trappers was based on the assumption that trappers
would trust fur dealers more than a third unknown person, which would produce better data
quality, particularly in terms of accuracy in the description of the catch site.
Frozen samples of liver were sent to the Wetland Biochemistry Lab at Louisiana State
University for mercury analysis. Total mercury level in liver samples was analyzed by cold
vapor atomic absorption spectroscopy. Mercury levels in river otter tissue were compared to
levels in fish. Most recent data on fish were provided by LDEQ for the areas where otter samples
were collected. No attempt was made to discriminate mercury level by age, because either no
differences have been found among age classes (Evans et al. 1998) or contradictory trends were
reported on the relationship between mercury level and age (Kucera 1983, Wren et al. 1986,
Francis and Bennett 1994).
Data were tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test and, if needed, log
transformation was used to satisfy the assumption of normality. Boxplots were used to
summarize the data. Because collecting enough otter samples from a single stream or watershed
is difficult, all samples, otter and fish, were grouped by parish for analysis. One-way and two-
way ANOVA (SAS PROC GLM, SAS Institute v 8.02) was used to determine differences in
mercury between fish and otter samples, and differences among parishes. Data from 1976 on
mercury levels in otter from the Atchafalaya basin (Beck 1977) were compared to samples
collected during 2002-2003 with one-way ANOVA (" = 0.05, or otherwise noted). Mercury
concentration surfaces were generated by spatial interpolation (kriging) (Isaaks and Srivastava


65
1989) of fish and otter data with software GS+ v. 5.0. (Gamma Design 2000), and overlaid to
stream maps with ArcView 3.3 (ESRI 2002) to identify new streams where further evaluation of
mercury level might be required.
Results
A total of 83 otter samples were collected from 2 fur dealers during 2002-2003. Samples
came from a large area in central Louisiana, but I considered for further analysis only samples
having an accurate location of the catch site. A subset of 59 samples collected from Rapides (n =
18), St. Landry (n = 37), and Avoyelles (n = 4) parishes were considered for analysis. Mercury
levels in fish collected in those same parishes in 2002-2003 were provided by LDEQ. Mercury
levels in otters ranged from 0.146 parts per million (ppm) to 4.08 ppm, with a mean value of
0.98 ppm, (SD = 0.97 ppm). A total of 87 fish samples were collected by LDEQ during that
period in Rapides parish (n = 21), St. Landry parish (n = 54), and Avoyelles parish (n = 12). For
fish the range of mercury concentration in tissue was 0.037-2.234 ppm, with a mean value of
0.47 ppm (SD = 0.43 ppm) (Table 5.1, Figure 5.1); a left skewed distribution was evident for
both the fish and otter data.
The data did not support the assumption of normality (W = 0.77, P<0.0001; W = 0.76,
P<0.0001, for fish and otter respectively), the dataset was log-transformed. Analysis of samples
from 2002-2003 indicated that, in general, mercury levels in otter samples were greater than in
fish (F = 19.86, d.f. = 1, P<0.001). A comparison by parish of mercury levels in otter tissue
indicated that otters from Rapides parish had greater mercury level than samples from Avoyelles
and St. Landry (F = 5.44, d.f. =2, P = 0.007). Mercury concentrations in fish were greater in
Rapides parish than in the other 2 parishes at " = 0.1 (F = 2.84, d.f. = 2, P = 0.06). Samples from
St. Landry were compared to samples from the upper Atchafalaya basin collected by Beck in
1996 (Beck 1977), and indicated that mercury levels in otters in 2002-2003 were significantly
lower than samples collected during 1976 (F = 17.03, d.f. = 1, P<0.001).
The otter mercury surface shows areas of concern in the northeast part of Rapides parish,
more precisely around the city of Alexandria (Figures 5.2, 5.3). The surface based on fish data


66
indicates potential areas of concern south of Alexandria and north central part of St. Landry
parish around the towns Lebeau and Bolden (Figure 5.3). Figure 5.4 shows a diagram of the
areas with the highest mercury concentration based on the otter and fish mercury concentration
surfaces shown in Figure 5.3.
Discussion
Concentration of toxic metals in the environment has increased several orders of
magnitude over the last century as a consequence of human activities, with mercury among the
toxic metals that is most frequently found in aquatic ecosystems and a major cause of concern
for human health (Morel et al. 1998). Historically the main sources were discharges from
industrial plants, and the contaminated areas were more localized. In recent decades those
sources have changed, creating a widespread contamination as a consequence of atmospheric
transport of mercury produced by the combustion of fossil fuels. Thus, there is a need for a
mercury monitoring program that would offer access to areas that may not be recognized as areas
of concern based on the level of human activity. Results from this study support the use of river
otters as a complementary species, along with fish, to be used as a monitoring species of mercury
levels in streams of Louisiana.
Previous studies have suggested that otters could be used as a bioindicator of
environmental quality if their populations were periodically sampled to determine presence and
concentration of contaminants (Halbrook et al. 1996). However, sample size has been indicated
as an issue in studies on river otters and contaminants, making it difficult to use this species to
monitor habitat quality (Evans et al. 1998). For Louisiana, sample size should not be an issue at
current levels of harvest, which would provide enough samples to monitor numerous streams 
that are not currently being monitored. There are approximately 20 fur dealers and > 1,400
licensed trappers in Louisiana, and during the 2003-2004 trapping season 2003-2004 more than
5,700 otters were harvested by more than 1,400 licensed trappers. Thus, collecting a small
fraction of the total harvest is possible annually, particularly considering that fur dealers and
trappers were cooperative collecting carcasses for this study.


67
Table 5.1. Mercury level(Hg) in otter tissue samples collected in Rapides (RPS), St. Landry
(SLD), and Avoyelles (AVY) parish, Louisiana, during 2002-2003. ppm: parts per million.
Parish
Hg
(ppm)
Parish
Hg
(ppm)
Parish
Hg
(ppm)
AVY
0.24
SLD
0.19
SLD
1.17
AVY
0.80
SLD
0.22
SLD
1.31
AVY
1.43
SLD
1.08
SLD
1.42
AVY
0.71
SLD
0.28
SLD
0.97
RPS
0.19
SLD
0.14
SLD
0.52
RPS
0.28
SLD
0.25
SLD
3.20
RPS
4.08
SLD
0.19
SLD
0.50
RPS
2.52
SLD
1.18
SLD
0.43
RPS
0.86
SLD
1.58
SLD
0.19
RPS
3.70
SLD
1.41
SLD
0.26
RPS
1.50
SLD
0.24
SLD
0.55
RPS
2.07
SLD
0.27
SLD
1.00
RPS
1.00
SLD
0.25
SLD
0.49
RPS
3.17
SLD
0.29
SLD
0.63
RPS
0.23
SLD
0.58
SLD
1.05
RPS
0.99
SLD
0.52
RPS
0.17
SLD
0.55
RPS
0.27
SLD
1.18
RPS
0.80
SLD
0.25
RPS
0.46
SLD
0.60
RPS
1.9
SLD
0.90
RPS
4.00
SLD
0.58


68
Table 5.2. Mercury level (Hg) in fish tissue samples collected in Rapides (RPS), St. Landry
(SLD), and Avoyelles (AVY) parish by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality
during 2002-2003. ppm: parts per million.
Parish
Hg
(ppm)
Parish
Hg
(ppm)
Parish
Hg
(ppm)
Parish
Hg
(ppm)
AVY
0.28
RPS
1.14
SLD
0.76
SLD
0.34
AVY
0.31
RPS
1.14
SLD
0.43
SLD
0.25
AVY
0.33
RPS
0.25
SLD
0.21
SLD
0.32
AVY
0.38
RPS
1.08
SLD
0.24
SLD
0.31
AVY
0.39
RPS
0.59
SLD
0.64
SLD
0.51
AVY
0.17
RPS
0.82
SLD
0.45
SLD
0.18
AVY
0.24
RPS
1.65
SLD
0.27
SLD
0.50
AVY
0.48
RPS
1.72
SLD
0.68
SLD
0.53
AVY
0.24
RPS
1.87
SLD
0.54
SLD
0.21
AVY
0.75
RPS
1.78
SLD
0.44
SLD
0.22
AVY
0.70
SLD
0.22
SLD
2.23
SLD
0.27
AVY
0.82
SLD
0.22
SLD
0.45
SLD
0.34
RPS
0.12
SLD
0.26
SLD
0.40
SLD
1.04
RPS
0.11
SLD
0.33
SLD
0.61
SLD
0.98
RPS
0.16
SLD
0.08
SLD
0.47
SLD
0.20
RPS
0.17
SLD
0.15
SLD
0.19
SLD
0.15
RPS
0.33
SLD
0.12
SLD
0.11
SLD
0.24
RPS
0.04
SLD
0.16
SLD
0.13
SLD
0.19
RPS
0.08
SLD
0.77
SLD
0.30
RPS
0.03
SLD
0.65
SLD
0.31
RPS
0.04
SLD
0.24
SLD
0.60
RPS
0.13
SLD
0.57
SLD
0.17
RPS
0.72
SLD
0.67
SLD
0.29


69
Figure 5.1. 5th/95th percentile boxplots describing mercury levels (ppm) in fish and otters in
central Louisiana. 2002-2003.
Figure 5.2. Area in central Louisiana where mercury concentration surfaces were generated by
kriging using mercury levels in otter and fish sampled during 2002-2003.


70
Figure 5.3. Mercury concentration surfaces generated by kriging using concentrations in otter
(top) and fish (bottom) from samples collected in central Louisiana during 2002-2003.


71
Rapides parish
Avoyelles parish
Evangeline parish
St. Landry parish
10 miles
Figure 5.4. Diagram showing streams in potential areas of concern for further analysis of
mercury levels in fish based on fish data from the Louisiana Department of Environmental
Quality (dashed line) and from river otter data (solid line).
Mercury levels in otters were greater than levels in fish in the same area, suggesting that
river otters could be used as an early indicator of areas of concern regarding mercury levels in
aquatic ecosystems. This is an important element to be considered in any monitoring program
where the minimum detection level of the chemical being analyzed could become an issue.
Mercury levels reported here, although higher than in fish, were lower than levels
reported in the last 2 decades for other areas in the United States and Canada (Kucera 1983,
Wren et al. 1986, Foley et al. 1988, Halbrook et al. 1996, Evans et al. 1998). Without any other
evidences, this could be considered as an encouraging indication of better water quality in
Louisiana streams. In this regard, it is worth noting that the range of current mercury level in
otters in Louisiana is very similar to the range reported for the early ‘80s in Connecticut and
Massachusetts for areas with no known mercury contamination (O’Connor and Nielsen 1981).


72
Examining historical data on mercury levels in otters from the upper Atchafalaya basin
(see Beck 1977) offered a unique opportunity to make a temporal comparison for samples
collected in the same area. Interestingly, the mercury levels in otters reported by Beck in 1977
were coincident with the enactment of the Clear Water Act, which established the basic structure
for regulating discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States (US EPA 2005). As a
result, the amount of emissions of human-caused mercury dropped from 220 tons/year in 1990 to
48 tons/year in 2004 (US EPA 2005). Thus, it seems valid to assume that the decline in mercury
levels in river otters from the upper Atchafalaya basin could be the result of a reduction in the
amount of mercury released in the atmosphere, which also may be indicating an improvement in
aquatic systems in the area in terms of mercury contents.
A third element in the evaluation of river otters as an indicator species of water quality in
Louisiana was the potential to identify streams or areas where further analysis of mercury levels
in fish could be beneficial and where sampling fish was infeasible. Mercury concentration
surfaces generated with otter and fish data supported the use of otters as a surrogate species to
monitor mercury levels in the biota when sampling fish was difficult. Streams for further
analysis identified in the surface generated by otter data, but not in the surface based on fish
data, were Little Horsepen Creek, Wiggins Bayou, Persimmon Bayou, Hynson Bayou, Bayou
Rapides, Bayou Maria, and Flagon Bayou, all in Rapides parish.
Although results of this study indicate that a monitoring program based on river otters
seems possible for Louisiana, some aspects of such a program should be defined before
implementation. One of those aspects is to develop a network that will guarantee a reliable
sample collection scheme, where LDEQ personnel support and instruct trappers and fur dealers
in the process of sample collection and preservation. Another aspect to be consider is a form to
compensate trappers and dealer for their participation in the program; a nominal monetary value
paid for each carcass collected could be a possibility since currently most of the carcasses are
being thrown away.


73
Intensive monitoring of movement and fate of otters has been recommended to determine
changes in abundance and distribution (Halbrook et al. 1996). Because relating presence of toxic
chemicals in otters to specific sources is difficult due to otter movements and the relation of
these movements to habitat features, conducting a radiotelemetry study of otter movements
would presumably clarify patterns and may elucidate movement patterns relative to pollution
sources or the effect of habitat quality ( i.e. mercury concentration in fish/water, on river otter
home range size, or habitat used).


74
CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH ON RIVER OTTER
As emphasized in a recent publication, natural systems are complex, interconnected and
dynamic, and influenced by an inordinate number of factors (Newton and Freyfogle 2005).
These intrinsic characteristics of natural systems make them very difficult to monitor and
synthesize, creating important levels of uncertainty that could lead exploited populations to
extinction. The ultimate goal in renewable resource management is its sustainable use which,
although denied by many, continues to be the backbone of any program of resource exploitation.
A solid understanding of the mechanisms governing natural systems is probably the most
important goal of any person directly involved with the management and conservation of
exploited natural resources.
Previous chapters have identified and described patterns in otter harvest in Louisiana.
Given the poor understanding of the processes and dynamics of this activity in Louisiana, the
identification of spatial harvest patterns described in this study represents a first step in the
development of a management program for the sustainable use of river otters in the state.
Without information on otter population dynamics, a management plan based on the same
philosophical principles considered in fisheries for the development of marine protected areas
(MPA) seems a reasonable option in Louisiana.
Pursuing the development of a management program based on MPAs also is supported
by the high spatial variability in otter habitat in Louisiana and the effects of environmental
stochasticity. It has been noted in other studies that variation in otter occurrence has a spatial
structure (Barbosa et al. 2001). Considering the important variation in habitat structure for river
otters in Louisiana, ranging from coastal wetlands and marshes, to streams and forested wetlands
in upland regions, this spatial structure also is expected to occur in Louisiana. Uncertainty from
environmental stochasticity also could play a major role in a management plan for the species in
Louisiana, and indication of the potential effects of changes in the environment  could be 


75
changes in distribution and high mortality registered for nutria (Myocastor coypus) as
consequence of hurricanes affecting Louisiana (Carter et al. 1999, Carter and Leonard 2002).
These arguments indicate that a management plan based on harvest quotas to achieve
sustainable use of river otters could be difficult to achieve in Louisiana; levels of uncertainty
coming from lack of knowledge on dynamics of the population in coastal and upland areas make
it difficult to estimate and adjust a quota for a sustainable harvest program. Establishing spatial
harvest controls for river otters in Louisiana could offer the possibility of managing a number of
protected areas where ecological baseline information could be collected (Arcese and Sinclair
1997); this information currently impossible to obtain given the confounding effects of human
activity (i.e., trapping) on river otter populations and other furbearer species..
Temporal patterns in otter harvest also should be considered. The ARIMA model
proposed in this study as a tool to forecast number of otters to be harvested in future trapping
seasons represents an advance in the development of a management program for otters in
Louisiana. Although the ARIMA model does not incorporate biological information, but rather
only past number of pelts harvested in previous trapping seasons, the model offers state
managers the opportunity to adjust other variables in the system, such as the number of licensed
trappers, and foresee potential changes or trends in the harvest activity.
Patterns and models proposed in this study are based on the analysis of harvest data;
consequently, there are limitations in the quality of hypotheses that can be generated. Baseline
data on population ecology are needed for river otters in Louisiana. Much of this information
could be collected directly from the analysis and study of carcasses collected from trappers and
fur dealers. Information on age, sex, reproductive status, and presence of parasites is valuable
information that could be recorded from carcasses, all of which is needed to develop a sound
management plan. A survey among trappers also should be a priority. Without a clear
understanding of the dynamics of the trapper populations, a realistic approach to the sustainable
use of river otters in Louisiana will never reach its full effectiveness.


76
REFERENCES
Anonymous. 1997. Fertilization of Louisiana rice. Louisiana State University - Agricultural
Center. Pub. 2418 (4M) 11/97.
Anselin, L. 1995. Local indicators of spatial association  - LISA. Geographical Analysis 27:93-
115.
Anselin, L. 1996. The Moran scatterplot as an ESDA tool to assess local instability in spatial
association. In Spatial Analysitcal Perspectives on GIS, Fischer, M., Scholten, H.J., and
D. Unwin (Eds) Taylor and Francis, London. Pp 111-125.
Anselin, L. 2004. GeoData Analysis software v 0.9.5-i5, University of Illinois.
Arcese, P. and A.R. Sinclair. 1997. The role of protected areas as ecological baselines. Journal of
Wildlife Management 61(3):587-602.
Armstrong, D.M. 1972. Distribution of mammals of Colorado. University of Kansas, Mus. Nat.
Hist., Monogr. 3. 415 pp.
Armstrong, J. B., and A. N. Rossi.  2000.  Status of avocational trapping based on the 
perspectives of state furbearer biologists.  Wildlife Society Bulletin  28:825-832.
ASTM. 1998. Annual book of ASTM standards, volume 11.05. American Society for Testing
and Materials, Philadelphia, PA.
Balmford, A., Gravestock, P., Hockley, N., McClean, C.J., and C.M. Roberts. 2004. The
worldwide costs of marine protected areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science 101(26):9694-9697.
Barbosa, A.M., Real, R., Márquez, A.L., and M.A. Rendón. 2001. Spatial, environmental and
human influences on the distribution of otter (Lutra lutra) in the Spanish provinces.
Diversity and Distribution 7:137-144.
Beck, D. 1977. Pesticides and heavy metal residues in Louisiana river otter. Thesis. Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX.
Berryman, A.A. 1991. Can economic forces cause ecological chaos? The case of the Northern
California Dungeness crab fishery. Oikos 62:106-109.
Boesch, D.F. M.N. Josselyn, Mehta, A.J., Morris, J.T., Nuttle, W.K., Simenstad, C.A. and D.J.P.
Swift. (Eds). 1994. Scientific assessment of coastal wetland loss, restoration and
management in Louisiana. Journal of Coastal Research. Special Issue No. 20.
Bohnsack, J.A. 1993. Marine reserves: they enhance fisheries, reduce conflicts, and protect
resources, Oceanus 36:63-71.


77
Botsford, L.W., Methot Jr., R.D., and W.E. Johnston. 1983. Effort dynamics of the northern
California Dungeness crab (Cancer magister) fishery. Canadian Journal of Fishery and
Aquatic Sciences 40:337-346.
Box, G.P. and G.M. Jenkins. 1970. Time series analysis, forecasting and control. San Francisco:
Holden-Day.
Box, G.P., Jenkins, G.M., and G.C. Reinsel. 1994. Time series analysis, forecasting and control.
Englewood Clifs, NJ Prentice-Hall.
Brand, C.J., Keith, L.B., and C.A. Fischer. 1976. Lynx responses to changing snowshoe hare
densities in central Alberta. Journal f Wildlife Management 40:416-428.
Brand, C.J. and L.B. Keith. 1979. Lynx demography during a snowshoe hare decline in Alberta.
Journal of Wildlife Management 43:827-849.
Brocklebank, J.C. and D.A. Dickey. 2003. SAS for forecasting time series. SAS Institute, Inc.
Cary, NC.
Carter, J., Foote, A.L., and L.A. Johnson-Randall. 1999. Modeling the effects of nutria
(Myocastor coypus) on wetland loss. Wetlands 19(1):209-219.
Carter, J. and B.P. Leonard. 2002. A review of the literature on the worldwide distribution,
spread of, and efforts to eradicate the coypu (Myocastor coypus). Wildlife Society
Bulletin 30(1):162-175.
Cattadori, I.M., Haydon, D.T., Thirgood, S., and P.J. Hudson. 2003. Are direct measures of
abundance a useful index of population density? The case of red grouse harvest. Oikos
100:439-446.
Caughley, G. 1977. Analysis of vertebrate populations. John Wiley & Sons. New York, US.
Chabreck, R., Holcombe, J., Linscombe, G., and N. Kinler. 1982. Winter food of river otters
from saline and fresh environments in Louisiana. Proc. Annu. Conf. Southeast. Assoc.
Fish and Wildl. Agencies, 36:373-383.
Chabreck, R., Edwards, T., and G. Linscombe. 1985. Factors affecting the distribution and
harvest of river otters in Louisiana. Proc. Annu. Conf. Southeast. Assoc. Fish and Wildl.
Agencies, 39:520-527.
Chabreck, R., Linscombe, G., Hartley, S., Johnston, J., and A. Martucci. 2001. Coastal
Louisiana. Marsh-vegetation types CD. USGS, LA Dept. Wildlife and Fisheries. 
Chatfields, C. 2001. Time-series forecasting. Chapman & Hall/CRC London.
Clark, C.W. 1990. Mathematical bioeconomics. The optimal management of renewable
resources. John Wiley & Sons. New York, US.


78
Connell, D.W. 1990. Bioaccumulationof xenobiotic compounds. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton,
FL.
Duke, T.W. and W.L. Kruczynski. 1992. A summary of the report: Status and trends of emergent
and submerged vegetated habitats in the Gulf of Mexico, USA. In: Flock G. (Ed.) The
Gulf of Mexico Program, December 2-5, 1990, New Orleans, LA: US Army Engineers.
Edwards, T. 1983. River otter abundance, distribution and habitat use in Louisiana. M.Sc.
Thesis. School of Forestry, Wildlife and Fisheries. Louisiana State University. 42 pp.
Elphick, C.S. 2000. Functional equivalency between rice fields and seminatural wetland habitats.
Conservation Biology 14(1):181-191.
Elphick, C.S. 2004. Assessing conservation trade-offs: identifying the effects of flooding rice
fields for waterbirds on non-target bird species. Biological Conservation 117(1):16-24.
Elphick, C.S. and L.W. Oring. 2003. Conservation implications of flooding rice fields on winter
waterbirds communities. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 94:17-29.
Elton, C. and M. Nicholson. 1942. The ten-year cycle in numbers of the lynx in Canada. Journal
of Animal Ecology 11:215-244.
Ensminger, A. and G. Linscombe. 1980. The fur animals, the alligator, and the fur industry in
Louisiana. Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Bulletin, 109. 69 pp.
ESRI. Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc. 2002. ArcView GIS 3.3. Spatial Analyst
extension.
ESSA: Endangered Species Scientific Authority. 1978. Export of bobcat, lynx, river otter, and
American ginseng.  Federal Register 43, 11082-11093.
Enders, W. 2004. Applied econometric time series. Wiley & sons, Inc.
Evans, R.D., E.M. Addison, J.Y. Villeneuve, K.S. MacDonald, and D.G. Jaochim. 1998. An
examination of spatial variation in mercury concentrations in otter (Lutra canadensis) in
south-central Ontario. The Science of the Total Environment, 213:239-345.
Finsen, L. and S. Finsen. 1994. The animal rights movement in America. Twayne Publishers.
New York
Fleming, W.J., C.M. Bunk, G. Linscombe, N. Kinler, and C.J. Stafford. 1985. PCBs,
organochlorine pesticides, and reproduction in river otters from Louisiana. Proceedings
of the Annual Conference of Southeastern Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies
39:337-343.


79
Foley, R.E., Jackling, S.J., Sloan, R.J., and M.K. Brown. 1988. Organochlorine and mercury
residues in wild mink and otter: comparison with fish. Environmental Toxicology and
Chemistry 7:363-374.
Fotheringham, A.S., Brunsdon, C., and M.Charlton. 2000. Quantitative geography. Perspectives
on spatial data analysis. SAGE Publications, London.
Francis, D.R. and K.A. Bennett. 1994. Additional data on mercury accumulation in northern
Michigan river otters. Journal of Freshwater Ecology 9:1-5.
Gamma Design Software. 2000. GS+ Geostatistics for the Environmental Sciences. Michigan,
US.
Getz, W.M. and R.G. Haight. 1989. Population harvesting. Demographic model of fish, forest,
and animal resources. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, US.
Gilpin, M.E. 1973. Do hares eat lynx? American Naturalist 107:727-730.
Good, I.J. 1983. The philosophy of exploratory data analysis. Philosophy of Science 50:283-295.
Gottman, J.M. 1981. Time series analysis. A comprehensive introduction for social scientists.
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK.
Haining, R. 2003. Spatial data analysis. Theory and practice. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Haggan, V. and T. Ozaki. 1981. Modeling nonlinear random variations using an amplitude-
dependent autoregressive time series model. Biometrika 68:189-196.
Halbrook, R., A. Wool, G. Huberp, S. Ross, and W. Braselton. 1996. Contaminant concentration
in Illinois mink and otter. Ecotoxicology, 5:103-114.
Hankin, D.G. 1985.Proposed explanation for the fluctuation in abundance of Dungeness crab: a
review and critique. In: Proc. Symp. Dungeness crab biology and management. Univ. Of
Alaska Sea Grant rep. 85-3:305-326.
Hartley,S., Pace III, R., Johnston, J., Swan, M., O’Neil, C., Handley, L., and L.Smith. 2000 A
GAP analysis of Louisiana. Final report. USGS.
Holcombe, J. 1980. Winter food habits of the river otter in southern Louisiana. M. Sc. Thesis.
Louisiana State University. 90 pp.
Holland, D.S. 2002. Integrating marine protected areas into models for fishery assessment and
management. Natural Resource Management 15(3): 369-386.


80
Hubbard, B. and T. Serfass. In press. Assessing the Distribution of Reintroduced Populations of
River Otters in Pennsylvania (USA):  Development of a Landscape- Level Approach.
IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin.
Hunsaker, C. 2001. Why spend time on spatial uncertainty? In Spatial uncertainty in ecology:
implications fo remote sensing ad GIS applications. Hunsaker, c., Goodchild, M.F.,
Friedl, M., and T. Case (Eds.) Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
Isaaks, E.H. and R.M. Srivastava. 1989. An introduction to applied goestatistics. Oxford
University Press
Jonzén,N., Ranta, E., Lundberg, P., Kaitala, V.., and H. Lindén. 2003. Harvesting-induced
population fluctuations? Wildlife Biology 9(1):59-65.
Kendall, B.E., Briggs, C.J., Murdoch, W.W., Turchin, P., Ellner, S.P., McCauley, E., Nisbet,
R.M., and S.N. Wood. 1999. Why do populations cycle? A synthesis of statistical and
mechanistic modeling approaches. Ecology 80(6):1789-1805.
Kucera, E. 1983. Mink and otter as indicators of mercury in Manitoba waters. Canadian Journal
of Zoology, 61:2250-2256.
Kruuk, H. 1995. Wild otter. Predation and populations. Oxford University Press.
Levine, N. 2000. CrimeStat 1.1. A spatial statistics program for the analysis of crime incident
locations. The National Institute of Justice. Washington D.C.
Liers, E.E. 1951. Notes on the river otter (Lutra canadensis) Journal of Mammal Research 32:1-
9.
Linscombe, R.G. and N. Kinler. 1985. Fur harvest distribution in Louisiana. Pages 187-199 in:
C.F. Bryan, P.J. Zwank and R.H. Chabreck, editors.  Proceedings of the Fourth Coastal
Marsh and Estuary Management Symposium.  Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
LA.
Lizotte, R.E. 1994. Biology of the river otter (Lutra canadensis). M.S. Thesis, Memphis State
University, Memphis, TN
Ljung, G.M. and G.E. Box. 1978. On a measure of lack of fit in time series models. Biometrika
65:297-303.
Louisiana GIS. v. 2. A digital map of the state. http://atlas.lsu.edu.
Lourdais, O., Bonnet, X., DeNardo, D., and G. Naulleau. 2002. Do sex divergences in
reproductive ecophysiology translate into dimorphic demographic patterns? Population
Ecology 44:241-249.


81
Lovell, C.D., Leopold, B.D. and C.C. Shroshire. 1998. Trends in Mississippi predator
populations,1980-1995. Wildlife Society Bulletin  26: 552-556.
Lowery, G. 1974. The mammals of Louisiana and its adjacent waters. Louisiana State University
Press, Baton Rouge, LA.
Ludwing, D., Hilborn, R., and C. Walters. 1993. Uncertainty, resource exploitation, and
conservation: lessons from history. Science 260:17.
Mason C. 1989. Water pollution and otter distribution: a review. Lutra, 32:97-131.
Mason, C. and S. MacDonald. 1993. Impact of organochlorine pesticides residues and PCBs on
otters (Lutra lutra): a study from western Britain. The Science of the Total Environment.
138:127-145.
Mason, C. and C. Wren. 2001. Chapter 7: Carnivora. In: Ecotoxicology of wild mammals. R.
Shore and B. Rattner Editors. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Pp. 316-370.
May, R.M. 1974. Biological populations with non-overlapping generations: stable points, stable
cycles and chaos. Science 186:645-647.
McCullough, D.R. 1996. Spatially structured populations and harvest theory. Journal of Wildlife
Management 60(1):1-9.
Melquist, W.E. and M.G. Hornocker. 1983. Ecology of river otter in west central Idaho. Wildlife
Monographs, 83.
Melquist, W.E. and A.E. Dronkert. 1987. River otter. In: Wild Furbearer Management and
Conservation in North America. Ministry of Natural Resources. Ontario, Canada. Pp 627-
641.
Melquist, W.E., Polechla, P.J., and D. Toweil. 2003. River otter. In Wild mammals of North
America. Feldhamer, G.A., Thompson, B.C., and J.A. Chapman (Eds.). Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, US.
Moran, P.A. 1952. The statistical analysis of game bird records. Journal of Animal Ecology
21:154.
Moran, P.A. 1953a. The statistical analysis of the Canada lynx cycle, I. Structure and prediction.
Australian Journal of Zoology 1:163-173.
Moran, P.A. 1953b. The statistical analysis of the Canada lynx cycle, II. Synchronization and
meteorology. Australian Journal of Zoology 1:291-298.
Morel, F.M., Kraepiel, A.M, and M. Amyop. 1998. The chemical cycle and bioaccumulation of
mercury. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 29:543-566.


82
Myers J. H. and L.D. Rothman. 1995. Field experiments to study regulation of fluctuating
populations.  In: Population dynamics: New approaches and synthesis. Cappuccino N &
Price P W, (Eds), pp: 229-250.
Nair, S. and G. Agoramoorthy. 2002. Mating- and birth-related behaviour in captive small-
clawed otters. International Zoo News 49(1):19-22.
National Research Council. 1982. Impacts of emerging agricultural trends on fish and wildlife
habitat. National Academic Press, Washington D.C.
Nellis, C.H., Wetmore, S.P., and L.B. Keith. 1972. Lynx-prey interactions in central Alberta.
Journal of Wildlife Management 36:320-329.
Newton, J.L. and E.T. Freyfogle. 2005. Sustainability: a dissent. Conservation Biology 19(1):23-
32.
Nilsson, G. 1980. River otter research workshop. Florida State Museum. Gainesville, FL.
O’Connor, D.J. and S.W. Nielsen. 1981. Environmental survey of methylmercury levels in wild
mink (Mustela vison) and otter (Lutra canadensis) from the northeastern United States
and experimental pathology of methylmercurialism in the otter. In: Chapman, J.A. and D.
Pursley (Eds). The World Furbearer Conference Proceedings, Maryland.
Ostrom, C.W., Jr. 1990. Time series analysis. Regression techniques. SAGE Publications no 9.
Ott, R.L. and M.T. Longnecker. 2001. An introduction to statistical methods and data analysis.
Duxbury Press.
Raelsy, E.J. 2001. Progress and status of river otter reintroduction projects in the United States.
Wildlife Society Bulletin  29:856-862.
Ray, A.J. 1987. The fur trade in North America: an overview from a historical geographical
perspective. In Wild furbearer management and conservation in North America. Ministry
of Natural Resources, Ontario, Canada. Pp. 21-30.
Roos, A., E. Greyerz, M. Olsson, and F. Sandergren. 2001. The otter (Lutra lutra) in Sweden –
population tends in relation to DDT and total PCB concentration during 1968-1999.
Environmental Pollution, 111:457-469.
Rosenberg, A.A., Fogarty, M.J., Sissenwine, M.P., Beddington, J.R., and J.G. Sheperd. 1993.
Achieving sustainable use of renewable resources. Science 262:828-829. 
Royama, T. 1992. Analytical population dynamics. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Runge, M.C. 1999. Design and analysis of a model for adaptive harvest management of beaver
(Castor canadensis). Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University.


83
SAS Institute Inc. 2001. SAS software v. 8.02. SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA.
Schueneman, T. 2002. Rice in the crop rotation. Report SS-AGR-23. IFAS University of Florida
Shaw, G. and D. Wheeler. 1988. Statistical techniques in geographical analysis. Second Ed.
David Fulton Publishers. London, England.  
Shirley, M.G., G. Linscombe, N.W. Kinler, R.M. Knaus, and V.L. Wright. 1988. Population
estimates of river otters in a Louisiana coastal marshland. Journal of Wildlife
Management  52:512-515.
Sissenwine, M.P. and A.A. Rosenberg. 1993. Marine fisheries at a critical juncture. Fisheries
18(10):6-14.
Sjöåsen, T., J. Ozolins, E. Greyerz, and M. Olsson. 1997. The otter (Lutra lutra) situation in
Latvia and Sweden related to PCB and DDT levels. Ambio, 26:196-201.
St. Amant, L.S. 1959. Louisiana wildlife inventory and management plan. Louisiana Wildlife
and Fisheries Commission.
Sumalia, U.R. 1998. Protected marine reserves as fisheries management tools: a bioeconomic
analysis. Fisheries Research 18(10):6-14. 
Sutter II, G.W. 1993. Ecological Risk Assessment. Lewis Publishers, Inc. Boca Raton, FL.
Swain, E.B., Engstrom, D.R., Brigham, M.E., Henning, T.A., and P.L. Brezonik. 1992.
Increasing rates of atmospheric mercury deposition in midcontinental North America.
Science 257:784-787.
Systat Software, Inc. 2002. SigmaPlot v. 8.02a. Point Richmond, CA 94804-2028, USA.
Tarver, J., Linscombe, G., and N. Kinler. 1987. Fur animals, alligator, and the fur industry in
Louisiana. Fur and Refuge Division, Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. 74
pp.
Tong, H. 1977. Some comments on the Canadian lynx data. Journal of Royal Statistical Society,
Series A 140:432-436.
Tourenq, C., Bennetts, R.E., Kowalski, H., Vialet, E., Luchesi, J., Kayser, Y., and P. Isenmann.
2001. Are rice fields a good alternative to natural marshes for waterbird communities in
the Camargue, southern France? Biological Conservation 100(3):335-343.
Tukey, J.W. 1977. Exploratory data analysis. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Turchin, P. 2003. Complex population dynamics. A theoretical/empirical synthesis. Monographs
in Population Biology No 35. Princeton University.


84
Upton, G.J. and B. Fingleton. 1985. Spatial data analysis by example. Vol.1, point pattern and
quantitative data. Chichester: Wiley.
US EPA. 2005. Environmental Protection Agency. www.epa.gov accessed on 3/15/2005. 
Waterloo Maple Inc. 2005. Maple 9.5. Maplesoft 615 Kumpf Drive, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
N2V 1K8
Weinstein, M.S. 1977. Hares, lynx, and trappers. American Naturalist 111:806-808.
Wilson, G.T. 2001. Univariate time series: autocorrelation, linear prediction, spectrum, and state-
space model. In: A course in time series analysis, Peña D., Tiao, G.C., and R.S. Tsay
(Eds.) Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. New York.
Winterhalder, B.P. 1980. Canadian fur bearer cycles and Cree-Objbwa hunting and trapping
practices. American Naturalist 115:870-879.
Wren, C.D., Stokes, P.M., and K.L. Fischer. 1986. Mercury levels in Ontario mink and otter
relative to food levels and environmental acidification. Canadian Journal of Zoology
64:2854-2859.


85
APPENDIX
SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF NUMBER OF OTTER PELTS HARVESTED AND
OTTERS PER TRAPPER IN LOUISIANA 1984-2003. 


86
APPENDIX (cont.)


87
APPENDIX (cont.)


88
APPENDIX (cont.)


89
APPENDIX (cont.)


90
APPENDIX (cont.)


91
APPENDIX (cont.)


92
APPENDIX (cont.)


93
VITA
Daniel G. Scognamillo, a native to Argentina, received is B.S form the Universidad
Nacional de Mar del Plata in 1993. He also completed a master degree in Wildlife Ecology and
Conservation at the University of Florida in 2001. In August 2001, he enrolled in the doctoral
program in the School of Renewable Natural Resources at the Louisiana State University. He
will receive his degree in the Spring commencements in May 2005.
