--- 
source: 2005.pdf
--- 

Distribution and sprainting activity of the Otter (Lutra 
lutra) in the Pollino National Park (southern Italy)
C. PRIGIONI 1, L. REMONTI, A. BALESTRIERI, S. SGROSSO, G. PRIORE, C. MISIN,
M. VIAPIANA, S. SPADA and R. ANANIA
Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, Università di Pavia, Piazza Botta 9, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy
Received 21 December 2004, accepted 29 April 2005
From March 2001 to December 2002, 32 stretches (sampling stations, 
mean length 673 m) distributed on 17 watercourses of the Pollino National Park 
(southern Italy) and the surrounding area were searched monthly for otter Lutra 
lutra signs, mainly spraints. All the watercourses were positive for otter with 
a mean percentage of 82.2%, indicating a stable presence of otters, mainly on 
Sinni and Mercure-Lao catchments (central-northern part of the park). Mean 
sprainting activity was 12.8 sprainting sites/km and 31.7 spraints/km, and 
showed a seasonal variation only in 2001 with two peaks, in May-June and in 
October. Sprainting activity was positively correlated with the percentage of posi-
tive stretches on watercourses, confirming that spraint density can represent an 
indicator of the population size of otters. A preliminary evaluation of the rela-
tionship between fish availability and otter marking intensity was performed 
along 39 km of the River Sinni on one day. A positive correlation was found 
between sprainting intensity (spraints/km) and the number of suitable sites for 
fish, such as pools or stretches of streams with good vegetation cover. Sprainting 
activity seemed to be linked to the distribution of fish availability. Since the Pol-
lino National Park occupies a strategic position within the Italian otter range, an 
accurate management plan is needed to improve the quality of riverine ecosys-
tems and to conserve otters.
KEY WORDS: Lutra lutra, distribution, sprainting activity, southern Italy.
Introduction  
. 
. 
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     172
Study area 
 
. 
. 
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     172
Methods 
 
. 
. 
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     173
Results 
. 
. 
. 
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     173
Discussion 
 
. 
. 
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     177
Acknowledgements  
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     178
References 
 
. 
. 
.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     179
Ethology Ecology & Evolution 17: 171-180, 2005
1 Corresponding author: Claudio Prigioni (E-mail: prigioni@unipv.it).


172
C. Prigioni et alii
INTRODUCTION
The otter Lutra lutra, once widespread in Europe, has declined substantially 
in the last few decades (CHANIN 1985), becoming limited to small areas in central-
western countries (MACDONALD & MASON 1994, CONROY & CHANIN 2002). Several fac-
tors have been blamed for this trend, including human persecution, the destruction 
of riparian vegetation and the reduction in food supply due to various pollutants 
(MASON 1995, RUIZ-OLMO et al. 2002).
Monitoring of otter populations is commonly based on searches for signs of 
otters, such as spraints (faeces) and anal secretions, frequently deposited at promi-
nent sites (e.g. boulders and logs). During the 1980s, a number of standardized 
surveys based on the recognition of field signs were carried out in Mediterranean 
countries in order to assess the distribution and status of otters (GREEN & GREEN 
1981; MACDONALD & MASON 1982, 1983a, 1983b, 1984, 1985; ELLIOT 1983; LILES & 
JENKINS 1984; MACDONALD et al. 1985, 1986; CASSOLA 1986; PRIGIONI et al. 1986): 
Italy revealed one of the more critical situations. At present, the otter’s Italian range 
is confined to the southern part of the peninsula with an approximate extension of 
9.500 km2 (C. PRIGIONI unpublished data). In recent years, some new records have 
been found in several tributaries of the main rivers where the otter was recorded in 
the 1980s. Nevertheless, this seems to be due to an increase in otter surveys rather 
than to an effective expansion in distribution.
The Pollino National Park covers a large part of the otter’s Italian range and is 
a strategic area for the conservation of the species. In the present study, we report 
here on the distribution and marking behaviour of otters in the park and its sur-
roundings. The otter survey was conducted throughout two years by monthly sam-
plings in several watercourses in order to define (i) the percentage of marking, as a 
measure of the stable presence of otters, and (ii) the marking level as an approxi-
mate indicator of the population size of otters (MASON & MACDONALD 1987). Both 
parameters were considered to identify the most important areas for otters and for 
a preliminary evaluation of their environmental characteristics. This study is part 
of an otter project designed to outline a strategy for the conservation of otters and 
to improve riverine ecosystems.
STUDY AREA
The survey was undertaken in the Pollino National Park, the largest protected Italian 
area, located in southern Italy between the regions of Calabria and Basilicata. The area is 
about 1930 km2 in size, with altitudes ranging from the 200 m a.s.l. (lower Sinni River valley) 
to the over 2000 m a.s.l. (Pollino massif).
The landscape is predominantly mountainous, with very little urbanisation. The climate 
is characterised by sharp variations of temperature that reflect the wide altitudinal range.
The following main forest or pasture habitats are recognizable. The low-elevation level 
is dominated by mixed sclerophyllous evergreen oak, with Quercus ilex associated with Pista-
cia lentiscus and Myrtus communis. At medium elevation, mixed deciduous forests predomi-
nate (Q. cerris, Q. pubescens, Q. frainetto, Ostrya carpinifolia, Carpinus betulus and C. orienta-
lis). Higher elevations are characterised by forests, mainly occupied by beech (Fagus sylvatica) 
and cuirassed pine (Pinus leucodermis), an endemic relict species which represents the true 
emblem of the park. Mountain pastures are dominated by Selseria tenuifolia and Carex kitaibe-
liana.


173
Otter distribution and sprainting activity
The hydrographic system is mainly represented by the River Sinni which forms a wide 
east-west oriented valley in the north portion of the park and flows into the Ionian Sea and by 
the River Mercure-Lao, which originates from the Pollino massif and runs south-westwards 
toward the Tyrrhenian Sea. The main water system of the park consists of 408 km of riv-
ers and streams, of which 212 km and 73.5 km form the Sinni and Mercure-Lao catchments 
respectively. The hydrographic network shows a density of 0.21 km of watercourses per km2.
Most streams are characterised by a torrential flow, with rapid, shallow waters. More 
than 60% of the stations sampled for otters (reaches of watercourse) were characterized by sal-
monids; cyprinids predominated in middle-low reaches of the River Sinni (PRIGIONI et al. 2003).
Water is intensively used for field irrigation in the summer. Apparently uncontrolled 
canalisation and embankments often deeply alter riverbeds and riparian vegetation, which, 
when undisturbed, is formed mainly by poplars (Populus alba, P. nigra), alder (Alnus gluti-
nosa) and willows (Salix sp.).
METHODS
From March 2001 to December 2002, 32 reaches/sampling stations (mean length = 673 
m; min-max = 300-1100; SD = 197.6) distributed along 17 watercourses of the park and its 
surrounding areas, were searched monthly for otter signs (mainly spraints and anal secre-
tions). The number of sprainting sites and the number of spraints were counted. A reach 
of watercourse was considered negative (absence of otters) when no sign was found within 
it. A sprainting site was identified as a place with spraints that were at least 1 m from other 
ones (KRUUK et al. 1986). For each watercourse, the sprainting activity was expressed as 
annual mean percentage of surveys positive for otters [%P = (number of positive surveys/total 
number of surveys per station) × 100)] and as annual mean number of spraints and annual 
mean number of sprainting sites per kilometre. The monthly variation in sprainting intensity 
(spraints/km) was evaluated for 14 watercourses regularly marked throughout the study peri-
od. The %P between the 2 years (from March to December) was compared by a chi-square 
test using all the data and by Fisher’s Exact Test (FISHER 1935) for each watercourse; in addi-
tion, the number of spraints and the number of sprainting sites recorded for each watercourse 
were compared by the Mann-Whitney U test between the 2 years. The relationship between 
the number of spraints/sprainting sites and %P was tested by Spearman rank correlation (rs).
In the study area, PRIGIONI et al. (2003) assessed fish density by electrofishing in stretch-
es of watercourse picked at random inside the stations investigated for otter signs. They found 
a positive correlation between fish density and number of pools or water stretches covered 
with vegetation (mainly beds of reeds — Typha spp. and Phragmites australis — or riparian 
vegetation — willows and brambles — protruding over the water) and characterized by still or 
rather low, relatively deeper waters.
Hence, in order to perform a preliminary evaluation of the relationship between fish 
availability and otter marking intensity, 39 km of the River Sinni were surveyed in Novem-
ber 2002 in one day by eight operators, each of them monitoring a specific stretch. For each 
kilometre, the number of spraints and the number of suitable sites for fish were recorded. 
Spearman rank correlation was used for testing this relationship. In addition, the variation in 
number of suitable sites for fish along the River Sinni was assessed by a simple linear regres-
sion (significant level evaluated by F test).
RESULTS
During the study period, 82.2% of the stations sampled on 17 watercourses 
were positive for otters (Table 1). Twelve watercourses showed a %P ranging from 


174
C. Prigioni et alii
70% to 100%. The %P did not vary when comparing the data of 2001 with those of 
2002; significant variation was only recorded for three watercourses with a decrease 
in Serrapotamo (100% in 2001 vs 16.7% in 2002, P < 0.001) and Raganello (71.4% 
in 2001 vs 8.3% in 2002, P < 0.05), and an increase in Battendiero (83.3% in 2001 
vs 100% in 2002, P < 0.05).
The mean sprainting activity was 12.8 sprainting sites/km and 31.7 spraints/
km (Table 2). The two indices were strongly correlated (rs = 0.98, P < 0.001, n = 17). 
Sprainting activity, expressed in both ways, was positively correlated with the %P 
(rs = 0.74, P < 0.001, n = 32, for both correlations).
Despite the high %P in the north portion of the study area, together with an 
intense marking activity (Fig. 1), a significant fall of spraints/km from 2001 to 2002 
was observed for the River Sinni and for two main tributaries (Serrapotamo and 
Frido rivers; Table 3); a sharp decrease was also found in two less well marked 
watercourses (the S. Nocaio and Raganello rivers).
Throughout the study period, the monthly sprainting activity of otters 
(spraints/km) showed two peaks in 2001, in May-June and in October, and a sub-
stantial decrease in 2002 with a very small peak in March (Fig. 2). The number of 
otter spraints/km and the number of suitable sites for fish per km (mean = 6.6, min-
max = 0-23; SD = 5.78) recorded along 39 km of the River Sinni, were positively 
correlated (rs = 0.49, P = 0.004, n = 39, Fig. 3).
Table 1.
Watercourses surveyed for signs of otters and the percentage of surveys positive for otters (%P) dur-
ing the study period.
Watercourses
Number of sampled 
stations
Total number of 
surveys
%P
Peschiera
1
21
100.0
Battendiero
3
66
100.0
Fosso Paraturo
1
4
100.0
Sinni
6
119
99.2
Abatemarco
1
20
90.0
Argentino
1
19
89.5
S. Nocaio
1
18
88.9
Mercure-Lao
4
85
88.2
Frido
3
57
86.0
Fosso Schettino
1
5
80.0
Cogliandrino
2
44
77.3
Occido
1
20
70.0
Rosa
1
20
65.0
Sammarella 
1
2
50.0
Serrapotamo
3
51
41.2
Esaro
1
18
38.9
Raganello
1
20
30.0
Total
32
589
82.2


175
Otter distribution and sprainting activity
Table 2.
Mean sprainting activity for each watercourse monitored during the study period (number of sur-
veys = 589).
Watercourses
Sprainting sites/km
Spraints/km
Sinni 
26.9
68.3
Serrapotamo
1.7
2.5
Cogliandrino
10.6
18.5
Frido
10.3
17.7
Peschiera
11.2
27.0
Mercure-Lao
6.5
12.7
Battendiero
23.9
82.3
Fosso Schettino
2.0
2.6
Fosso Paraturo
3.7
4.4
Sammarella 
7.1
8.6
S. Nocaio
8.4
15.1
Abatemarco
4.9
9.0
Argentino
7.3
14.7
Rosa
3.2
5.4
Esaro
1.7
2.8
Occido
2.8
4.3
Raganello
11.4
27.4
Mean ± SD
12.8 ± 14.4
31.7 ± 51.3
Fig. 1. — Otter sprainting activity in Pollino National Park, showing three categories of intensity 
(spraints/km) recorded in 32 stretches of watercourse.


176
C. Prigioni et alii
Table 3.
Comparison between the mean sprainting intensity (spraints/km) recorded for 14 watercourses in 
the same period (March-December) of 2001 and 2002 (NS = not significant).
2001
2002
Watercourses
n
mean
median
n
mean
median
U
P
Sinni
48
96.1
72.2
56
46.3
41.1
955.5
0.01
Serrapotamo
20
3.2
1.2
23
2.1
      0
143.5
0.02
Cogliandrino
19
22.8
21.4
19
17.0
7.1
146.5
NS
Frido
18
34.1
32.5
30
11.0
7.5
76.5
<0.001
Peschiera
8
36.2
34.4
10
22.0
9.4
      17
NS
Mercure-Lao
35
13.8
8.0
39
10.6
6.7
603.5
NS
Battendiero
27
97.9
87.1
30
69.3
51.7
    291
NS
S. Nocaio
5
35.6
36.0
10
8.8
7.5
       9
0.05
Abatemarco
7
12.6
6.7
10
6.5
6.7
26.5
NS
Argentino
7
16.3
8.8
10
13.6
7.5
31.5
NS
Rosa
7
11.3
7.8
10
2.2
1.7
      18
NS
Esaro 
7
4.5
1.8
9
2.1
       0
      18
NS
Occido
7
6.8
6.3
10
3.6
3.7
23.5
NS
Raganello
7
73.3
23.3
10
3.5
       0
      13
0.03
Fig. 2. — Monthly variation in the number of spraints/km from March 2001 to December 2002 (data 
from 14 watercourses regularly marked throughout the study period).


177
Otter distribution and sprainting activity
DISCUSSION
Otters are difficult to observe in their habitat, and most surveys have been 
carried out using spraints, which are considered indicative of the mustelid presence 
(MASON & MACDONALD 1986 for a review).
Many authors have discussed the reliability of the use of spraints as a survey tool, 
suggesting that this technique must be employed with caution, especially for assessing 
habitat selection (JEFFERIES 1986, KRUUK et al. 1986, KRUUK & CONROY 1987, MASON & 
MACDONALD 1987). However, regular monitoring of medium-large areas can allow us to 
broadly define the status of otter populations (MASON & MACDONALD 1987).
In our study area, the high percentage of positive stations on watercourses 
points to a stable presence of resident otters. Therefore, the strong correlation 
between sprainting intensity and percentage of positive stations confirms that spraint/
sprainting site density can represent an indicator of population size of otters (JEF-
FERIES 1986, MASON & MACDONALD 1987). In addition, MASON & MACDONALD (2004) 
assessed the rate of otter population growth in some river catchments of western 
Britain calculating an index of otter population by combining the percentage of 
positive stations and the mean number of signs per sprainting site. They confirmed 
further that the percentage of stations positive for otters and the sprainting intensity 
together can be used as a measure of the performance of an otter population.
We found a higher mean sprainting activity than recorded in 1987-1991 for 
rivers surrounding the Pollino park, such as Agri (5.22 spraints/km) and Basento 
(3.34 spraints/km) (PRIGIONI & FUMAGALLI 1995). This evidence indicates that the 
River Sinni, characterized by a greater marking activity, is a watercourse of major 
importance for otters in the study area; by contrast, it was considered scarcely used 
by otters in the 1980s (MACDONALD & MASON 1983b, LOY & RACANA 1986).
The otter seems to be firmly present and abundant in the northern and central 
part of the park, where there is a good river system connected with surrounding 
watercourses holding viable otter populations (e.g. River Agri; PRIGIONI 1997). The 
River Serrapotamo, though scarcely marked by otters because of long periods with 
Fig. 3. — Relationship between number 
(n) of suitable sites for fish and the 
marking intensity of otters (spraints/km) 
recorded for 39 km of the River Sinni.


178
C. Prigioni et alii
no water, could be a corridor connecting the Sinni and Agri catchments. The south-
ern part of the study area was less well marked by otters with rivers discontinu-
ously used. Among these, the River Raganello, which maintains a satisfactory water 
level all year round, is quite isolated with respect to the main otter population of 
the park (Fig. 1). Probably, only roaming animals during dispersal reach it periodi-
cally, making it a suitable corridor for southwards otter expansion.
The seasonality of otter sprainting behaviour has been discussed by several 
authors, who formulated different interpretations, usually adapted to local situa-
tions (e.g. KRUUK et al. 1986, MASON & MACDONALD 1987). In northern and central 
Europe marking activity is more intense from October to March and falls from 
June-July to September (CONROY & FRENCH 1987, MACDONALD & MASON 1987, KRANZ 
1996). In the Mediterranean habitat, PRIGIONI & FUMAGALLI (1995) observed a simi-
lar trend in some rivers of southern Italy, while little evidence of seasonal peaks in 
marking was recorded in Spain (DELIBES et al. 1991, RUIZ-OLMO & GOSÁLBEZ 1997). 
In the present study, our results indicate an obvious bi-modal trend in 2001, but 
this was not confirmed in 2002. Variation in sprainting behaviour could be related 
to the reproductive cycle, with peaks of marking when cubs start to move within 
the family group territory (PRIGIONI et al. 1995, KRANZ 1996). Our data agree in part 
with this interpretation.
Sprainting activity has also been used to assess habitat selection, although 
this has some limitations and represents a controversial issue, which has stimulated 
intense discussion (KRUUK et al. 1986, KRUUK & CONROY 1987, MASON & MACDONALD 
1987). Some authors recorded a positive correlation between marking activity and 
riverbank vegetation cover (MASON & MACDONALD 1985), while in other cases this 
relationship was not observed (e.g. LILES & JENKINS 1984). Other authors assessed 
the food supply for otters and concluded that fish prey availability is the main fac-
tor determining otter distribution (GREEN et al. 1984, KRUUK et al. 1993, PRENDA & 
GRANADO-LORENCIO 1996, RUIZ-OLMO et al. 2001). Our preliminary evaluation of the 
relationship between spraint density and habitat features agree with this second 
hypothesis, showing that, to a certain extent, otter marking activity is influenced by 
fish availability. In the River Sinni, the number of suitable sites for fish decreased 
from upstream to downstream (R2 = 0.4, F = 24.4, P < 0.001) with higher values 
along stretches characterized by a torrential flow and dominated by salmonids.
In Mediterranean catchments, characterized by high summer temperatures, 
drought and water extraction which further reduces river flows, fish availability 
seems to be related to the presence of scattered pools well covered with vegetation, 
which offer suitable habitats to fish and, consequently to otters. Therefore, all man-
agement actions that result in reduced diversity of aquatic habitats represent the 
main threat to otter conservation in the Pollino National Park. Bearing in mind the 
fundamental role that the park plays in the conservation of otters, lying in a strate-
gic position for inter-population connectivity, a plan for river habitat management 
is urgently required (PRIGIONI et al. 2003).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was promoted and financially supported by the Pollino National Park. We also 
wish to thank Pietro Serroni for logistic support, Chris Mason for a critical reading of an earlier 
version of the manuscript, and Anna Loy and an anonymous referee for valuable comments.


179
Otter distribution and sprainting activity
REFERENCES
CASSOLA F. (Edit.) 1986. La Lontra in Italia. Censimento, distribuzione e problemi di conserva-
zione di una specie minacciata. WWF, Serie Atti e Studi 5: 1-135.
CHANIN P.R.F. 1985. The Natural History of Otters. London: Croom Helm Mammal Series, 179 
pp.
CONROY J.W.H. & CHANIN P.R.F. 2002. The status of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) in Europe 
— A review. In: Conroy W.H. et al., Edits. Proceedings of the first otter toxicology con-
ference. Journal of the International Otter Survival Fund 1: 7-28.
CONROY J.W.H. & FRENCH D.D. 1987. The use of spraints to monitor populations of otters 
(Lutra lutra L.). Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 58: 247-262.
DELIBES M., MACDONALd S.M. & MASON C.F. 1991. Seasonal marking, habitat and organochlo-
rine contamination in otters (Lutra lutra): a comparison between catchments in Andalu-
cia and Wales. Mammalia 55: 567-578.
FISHER R.A. 1935. The logic of scientific inference. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 98: 
39-54.
ELLIOT K.M. 1983. The otter (Lutra lutra L.) in Spain. Mammal Review 13: 25-34.
GREEN J. & GREEN R. 1981. The otter (Lutra lutra L.) in western France. Mammal Review 4: 
181-187.
GREEN J., GREEN R. & JEFFERIES D.J. 1984. A radio-tracking survey of otters Lutra lutra on a 
Perthshire river system. Lutra 27: 85-145.
JEFFERIES D.J. 1986. The value of otter Lutra lutra surveying using spraints: an analysis of its 
success and problems in Britain. Otters, (The Journal of the Otter Trust) 1 (9): 25-32.
KRANZ A. 1996. Variability and seasonality in sprainting behaviour of otters Lutra lutra on a 
highland river in central Europe. Lutra 39: 33-44.
KRUUK H., CARRS D.N., CONROY W.H. & DURBIN L. 1993. Otter (Lutra lutra L.) number and fish 
productivity in rivers in N.E. Scotland. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 65: 
171-191.
KRUUK H. & CONROY W.H. 1987. Surveying otter Lutra lutra population: a discussion of prob-
lems with spraints. Biological Conservation 41: 179-183.
KRUUK H., CONROY W.H., GLIMMERVEEN U. & OUWERKERK E.J. 1986. The use of spraints to sur-
vey populations of otters Lutra lutra. Biological Conservation 35: 187-194.
LILES G. & JENKINS L. 1984. A field survey for otters (Lutra lutra) in Yugoslavia. Journal of 
Zoology, London 203: 282-284. 
LOY A. & RACANA A. 1986. La Lontra in Basilicata. In: Cassola F., Edit. La Lontra in Italia. 
Censimento, distribuzione e problemi di conservazione di una specie minacciata. WWF, 
Serie Atti e Studi 5: 110-113.
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1982. The otter Lutra lutra in central Portugal. Biological Con-
servation 22: 207-215.
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1983a. The otter (Lutra lutra) in Tunisia. Mammal Review 13: 
35-37.
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1983b. The otter Lutra lutra in Southern Italy. Biological Con-
servation 25: 95-101.
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1984. Otters in Morocco. Oryx 18: 157-159.
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1985. Otters, their habitat and conservation in Northeast 
Greece. Biological Conservation 31: 191-210.
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1987. Seasonal marking in an otter population. Acta Therio-
logica 32: 449-462.
MACDONALD S.M. & MASON C.F. 1994. Status and conservation needs of the otter (Lutra lutra) 
in the Western Palearctic. Council of Europe, 66 pp.
MACDONALD S.M., MASON C.F. & DE SMET K. 1985. The otter (Lutra lutra) in north-central 
Algeria. Mammalia 49: 215-219.
MACDONALD S.M., MASON C.F. & SHALMON B. 1986. A survey for otters in Israel. Oryx 20: 233-
236.


180
C. Prigioni et alii
MASON C.F. 1995. Habitat quality, water quality and otter distribution. In: Prigioni C., Edit. 
Biology and conservation of mustelids. Proceedings II Italian Symposium on Carni-
vores. Hystrix (NS) 7 (1-2): 195-208.
MASON C.F. & MACDONALD S.M. 1986. Otters: ecology and conservation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 236 pp.
MASON C.F. & MACDONALD S.M. 1987. The use of spraints for surveying otter Lutra lutra popu-
lation: an evaluation. Biological Conservation 41: 167-177.
MASON C.F. & MACDONALD S.M. 2004. Growth in otter (Lutra lutra) populations in the UK as 
shown by long-term monitoring. Ambio 33: 148-152.
PRENDA J. & GRANADO-LORENCIO C. 1996. The relative influence of riparian habitat structure 
and fish availability on Otter Lutra lutra L. sprainting activity in a small Mediterranean 
catchment. Biological Conservation 76: 9-15.
PRIGIONI C. 1997. La Lontra. Una vita silenziosa negli ambienti acquatici. Bologna: Edagricole, 
171 pp.
PRIGIONI C., BOGLIANI G. & BARBIERI F. 1986. The otter Lutra lutra in Albania. Biological Con-
servation 36: 375-383.
PRIGIONI C. & FUMAGALLI R. 1995. Sprainting activity of the otter (Lutra lutra) in Italian rive-
rine habitat. In: Reuther C. & Rowe-Rowe D., Edits. Proceedings VI International Otter 
Colloquium, Pietermaritzburg 1993. Habitat 11: 135-137.
PRIGIONI C., FUMAGALLI R., SCHIRRU L. & CARUGATI C. 1995. Sprainting activity of captive otters: 
its relationship with breeding cycle and number of animals. In: Prigioni C., Edit. Biol-
ogy and conservation of mustelids. Proceedings II Italian Symposium on Carnivores, 
Hystrix (NS) 7 (1-2): 297-301.
PRIGIONI C., SGROSSO S., REMONTI L., BALESTRIERI A., ANANIA R., PRIORE G., RANDI E., BON-
COMPAGNI E., BERGONZI E. & ROMAGNOLI L. 2003. Ecologia e conservazione della Lontra 
(Lutra lutra) nel Parco Nazionale del Pollino. Dipartimento di Biologia Animale Universi-
tà di Pavia e Ente Parco Nazionale del Pollino, 52 pp.
RUIZ-OLMO J. & GOSÁLBEZ J. 1997. Observations on the sprainting behaviour of the otter Lutra 
lutra in the NE Spain. Acta Theriologica 42: 259-270.
RUIZ-OLMO J., LAFONTAINE L., PRIGIONI C. & LOPEZ-MARTIN J.M. 2002. Pollution and its effects 
on otter populations in South-Western Europe. In: Conroy W.H. et al., Edits. Proceed-
ings of the First Otter Toxicology Conference. Journal of the International Otter Survival 
Fund 1: 63-82.
RUIZ-OLMO J., LOPEZ-MARTIN J.M. & PALAZÓN S. 2001. The influence of fish abundance on the 
otter (Lutra lutra) populations in Iberian Mediterranean habitats. Journal of Zoology, 
London 254: 325-336.
