--- 
source: 2006-1.pdf
--- 

Hystrix It. J. Mamm (n.s.) 17 (1) (2006): 5-14
THE RECOVERY OF THE OTTER IN THE CEVENNES
(FRANCE): A GIS-BASED MODEL
XAVIER JANSSENS
1,2 a
, PIERRE DEFOURNY
1, JEAN DE KERMABON
3
PHILIPPE V. BARET
2
1 Department of Environmental Sciences and Land Use Planning - Geomatics - Université
catholique de Louvain, Croix du Sud, 2, bte 16, B-1348, Belgium
2 Biodiversity Research Centre and Unit of Genetics - Université catholique de Louvain,
Croix du Sud, 2, bte 14, B-1348, Belgium
3 Service Scientifique et du Plan, Parc national des Cévennes, 48400 Florac, France
a Fax: +32 10 47 88 98; E-mail: defaurny@enge.ucl.ac.be
ABSTRACT - The Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) is an elusive semi-aquatic mammal. Its
absence is difficult to prove and censuses can be biased by false-negative observations. A
model is proposed to correct this bias by predicting occurrence probabilities where obser-
vations are negative. In case of otter signs observation in one place, the probability to find
the species in another place is assumed to decrease if the distance between both places
increases. This approach is tested on a 15-years otter survey dataset (4,592 data) from the
National Cevennes Park (3,200 km2, France). Four methods are compared, using Euclidian
distances, decisional distances, cost-weighted distances and basin analyses. The validation
is performed on 61 stretches that were prospected each year in the Cevennes. For these
stretches, if observations were negative during a year A but positive during the previous and
the following year, observations were assumed to be false-negative during this year A and
compared to predictions given each modelling method. The modelling proves the interest of
describing the landscape and defining spatially weighted distances from places where otter
is present to predict the species occurrence where its search is unsuccessful. The results
highlight that, despite the high mobility of the otter, its distribution is limited by some water-
shed limits. Hydrographical basins represent a relevant spatial unit to predict the otter occur-
rence and to analyse its recovery. 
Key words: Lutra lutra, modelling, false-negative observatons, dispersal path, France
RIASSUNTO - L’espansione della Lontra nelle Cevennes (Francia): un modello preditti-
vo basato sul GIS. La Lontra (Lutra lutra) è un mammifero semi-acquatico dal comporta-
mento elusivo e il mancato ritrovamento di segni di presenza non implica necessariamente
l’assenza del mustelide dall’area in esame. Viene proposto un modello per stimare la prob-
abilità di presenza della specie quando le osservazioni diano esito negativo, assumendo che,
dati dei segni di presenza in un determinato tratto investigato, la probabilità di trovarne di
ulteriori in un secondo tratto sia inversamente proporzionale alla distanza intercorrente.
L’ipotesi è stata testata utilizzando il dataset (4592 dati) del censimento condotto nel Parco
Nazionale delle Cevennes (3200 km2, Francia) su un periodo di 15 anni.
Sono stati comparati quattro diversi metodi, utilizzando distanze Euclidee, distanze deci-
sionali, costo-distanze e analisi di bacino, e considerando 61 tratti di corsi d’acqua perlus-
trati annualmente. Per ogni tratto, se in un anno A le ricerche davano esito negativo ma negli 
5


INTRODUCTION
Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) are pro-
gressively 
recovering 
in 
Europe
(Chanin 2003. Reuther 2004; Rosoux
and Green 2004). They are used to dis-
perse long distances by streams, i.e.
several tens kilometres a night, but they
move by land as well, sometimes far
from water (Erlinge 1967; Green et al.,
1984; Kruuk 1995; Vaisfeld 1996;
Ruiz-Olmo et al., 2001; Chanin 2003;
White et al., 2003). Some authors
assume they use the easiest passes
through the hills (Harris 1968;
Saavedra 2002). Habitat features that
impede otter movements and limit its
expansion would be high mountains
(above 2000 m), sea, large towns,
hyper-pollution (along a stretch of at
least 50 km), hydroelectric dams, and
important reduction of the river flow
(Bouchardy 1986; Ruiz-Olmo et al.,
1991; Michelot and Bendelé 1995;
Saavedra 2002). Otter costs of moving
consequently seem to vary across the
landscape, but dispersal across water-
shed limits stays badly known (Harris
1968; Saavedra 2002).
Most Eurasian otters cannot be
observed and counted directly (Kruuk
1995; Ruiz-Olmo et al., 2001). In such
context, the survey of their faeces,
called spraints, is an appropriate
method to study the distribution of their
populations, and a broad indicator of
their activity patterns and habitat pref-
erences (Mason and Macdonald 1986;
Orebda abd Grabadi 1996; Hutchings
and White 2000; Reuther et al., 2000).
But this indirect census technique is a
source of several biases. The absence of
spraints does not necessarily mean the
absence of otters. ‘False negatives’ can
be a consequence of the inability of sur-
veyors to locate otter signs or can be
due to possible otter non-sprainting
behaviour (Ruiz-Olmo et al., 2001).
Spraint persistence varies between
habitat and climate. Spraint density
depends on individual behaviour, sea-
sons, food abundance, disturbance or
density of animals (Erlinge 1967;
Erlinge 1968; Kruuk 1995; Sutherland
1996; Guisan and Zimmermann 2000;
Scott et al., 2002; Chanin 2003;
Elmeros and Bussenius 2003).
The objective of the present work is to
correct the potential false-negative
observations that occur in an otter sur-
vey. Predictions will first be performed
at the stretch level, next, at the basin
level. Such method would allow us to
analyse and interpret a 15 years-survey
6
anni immediatamente precedente e successivo le osservazioni risultavano positive, i risultati
dell’anno A venivano considerati falsi-negativi e confrontati con gli esiti di ciascun metodo
predittivo. Le simulazioni evidenziano come la morfologia del territorio interposto tra i siti
di campionamento positivi e quelli negativi abbia un ruolo importante nel determinare la
probabilità di presenza della specie dove le ricerche sono risultate infruttuose. Malgrado
l’elevata mobilità della lontra, la sua distribuzione può essere limitata da alcuni spartiacque
e i limiti dei bacini idrografici rappresentano un fattore spaziale rilevante per prevedere la
distribuzione della specie e analizzarne le possibilità di recupero.
Parole chiave: Lutra lutra, modelli, falsi-negativi, vie di dispersione, Francia
Janssens X.


of otters in the Cevennes, at the front of
the recolonisation of the Mediterranean
catchment area from the Atlantic one,
in France (Fonderflick et al., 1995;
Defontaines 1999; Destre et al., 2000).
METHODS
1. Field survey
A yearly otter survey was performed from
1991 to 2005 by seventy-nine agents and/or
naturalists in the mid-mountainous land-
scape of National Cevennes Park (Fig. 1).
Agents or naturalists were assumed to be
reliable in searching otter signs. The survey
consisted in a search of the spraints along
356 stretches of 300 m riverbanks on one
side. The stretches were dependent on
accessibility and selected so that most of
the permanent streams, i.e. about 1000 km,
could be prospected throughout the Park.
They were about 5 to 10 kilometres away
from each other. The survey was mainly
performed during winter (68%) because the
vegetation wintering made the researches
easier and because sprainting activity was
higher than during other seasons, as
observed in northern and central Europe
(Mason and Macdonald 1986; Macdonald
and Mason 1987; Kruuk 1995). Researches
were delayed in case of floods. Despite rig-
orous and enthusiastic fieldwork, the sur-
veys were not perfectly systematic. Lack of
patrol effort during some years along a lot
of stretches was evident. Lack of signs
observations in areas where otters should
be present was frequent as well.
2. Modelling methods to correct false-neg-
atives at the stretch level
We tested the appropriateness of different
modelling assumptions in predicting otter
occurrence along stretches where the obser-
7
Figure 1 - The National Cevennes Park: location and hydrography.
Recovery of  otters: a GIS-based model


vation was negative. If the presence of an
otter spraint was observed along a stretch,
the probability P that the species occurs
along another stretch was assumed to
decrease as the distance D between both
stretches increases. A Gauss distribution
(P=exp[-D2/2s2]) was considered to model
this relation. The variance of the distribu-
tion s was fixed to 15 in order to obtain a
probability of otter occurrence lower than
0.01 in case of distance longer than 50 km,
i.e. a maximal home range size (e.g. Chanin
2003). Probabilities of occurrence were cal-
culated from all positive otter sign observa-
tions in the whole study area as the union of
all probabilities that the species occurs
given each distance. ArcGis 8.3 geographi-
cal information system (GIS) and Matlab 6
software were used to implement otter-ded-
icated algorithms. 
Three kinds of distance were compared
(Janssens X. et al., unpublished data): (1)
Euclidian distance, assuming that the land-
scape doesn’t affect otter movements; (2)
decisional distance, based on the hypothe-
sis that otter occurrence depends on random
individual decisions when crossing conflu-
ences (Le Boulengé et al., 1996); (3) cost-
weighted distance, which supposes a cost
of moving increasing with the slopes and
the absence of water. High mountains, pol-
lution or large urbanized areas, which are
not present in the Cevennes, were not con-
sidered in these models.
The validation was performed on 61
stretches that were prospected each year in
the Cevennes. For these stretches, if obser-
vations were negative during a year A but
positive during the previous and the follow-
ing year, observations were assumed to be
false-negative during this year A. This sup-
posed the presence of resident otters occu-
pying their home range for extended peri-
ods (Broyer and Erome 1982; Chanin
2003). If observations were negative during
a year A and negative as well during the
previous and/or the following year, obser-
vations were assumed to be true-negative
during this year A. Observations assumed
to be false- or true-negative were compared
to predictions given each modelling
method. A prediction was defined as an
occurrence with a probability P higher or
equals to 0.5. Error rates were estimated for
each modelling by the proportion of pre-
dicted absence in case of observation
assumed to be false-negative and predicted
presence in case of observation assumed to
be true-negative. 
3. Prediction of otter occurrence at the
basin level
After working at the stretch level, we
analysed the data at the scale of basins, i.e.
hydrographical catchment areas occupied
by 25 to 100 km of permanent rivers (mean
= 60 km, SD=25, N=19). Basins encom-
passed from 1 to 42 stretches (mean num-
ber = 12, SD=11). For each basin, we pre-
dicted otter occurrence if at least two obser-
vations were positive for otter spraint.
Given the recolonisation context, if several
observations were positive in a basin during
a year and missing for this same basin the
year after, otter was assumed to be present
in this basin during both years. If observa-
tions were missing in a basin one years A
and if several observations were only nega-
tive during several years before and after
this year A, otter was assumed to be absent
from this basin during the whole time inter-
val.
RESULTS
1. Actual observations
A total of 4,592 visits were performed
during 15 years along 82 to 238 stretch-
es each year (mean = 129, SD=51).
Spraints were first observed in the Lot
and Tarn basins, i.e. in the Atlantic
basin, around 1991 (Fig. 2, a). A recov-
ery movement was observed along a
NW-SE axis (Fig. 2, d, g, h), but poten-
8
Janssens X.


9
Figure 2 - Otter recovery in the Cevennes from 1991 to 2005. Comparisons between obser-
vations (a, d, g, j), results from one method of prediction at the stretch level (b, e, h, k), and
results from prediction at the basin level (c, f, i, l).
Recovery of  otters: a GIS-based model


tial false-negatives and the lack of visit
along some rivers some years prevent
us from knowing the date of first otter
occurrence in each river. A lot of nega-
tive observations that are probably
false, given positive observations along
the same stretches during previous and
following year, occurred upstream
along the rivers. The observation of
spraints along each main stream of the
studied area in 2005 proves that habitat
is favorable for otters.
2. Predictions at the stretch level
Among the three modelling methods
we compared (Janssens H. et al.,
unpublished data), the use of cost-
weighted distances yields the lowest
error rate, i.e. 33%. Results from this
method are consequently illustrated in
Fig. 2 (b, e, h, k). Probabilities of otter
occurrence were estimated for all sur-
vey stretches in case of negative and
missing data. Cost-weighted distance
function is in accordance with the
observations, except along some east-
ern rivers where it predicts otter occur-
rence several years before the first sign
observation (e.g. Altier and Gardons
rivers; Fig. 2 e). The use of Euclidian
distances predicts otter presence every-
where in the Cevennes Park from 1991,
which was not observed at all by means
of spraints. Its error rate is 56%. The
use of decisional distances predicts
occurrence at long swimming distances
in basins with few confluences, e.g. in
gorges, but it doesn’t correct observa-
tions assumed to be false-negative in
small spited tributaries. Its error rate is
43%. 
3. Predictions at the basin level
On a basin scale, otter colonisation
process can be mapped without ambi-
guity (Fig. 2, c, f, i, l). The absence of
otters in basins was concluded after 7 to
74 negative observations, which proba-
bilistically reduces the risk of a false
prediction of otter absence. First obser-
vations in the Mediterranean basin
were performed along the Luech and
Altier rivers, in 1992 and 1994 respec-
tively, while otter occurred along the
Tarnon and Mimente rivers from 1992
and along the Jonte river from 1995
(Fig. 2, f). The species recovered the
Dourbie river from 1997 to 1999 (Fig.
2, i) and the Herault and Gardons
basins in 2002 and 2005 respectively
(Fig. 2, l). 
DISCUSSION
As performed in the Cevennes, an otter
survey along stretches of 300 m is inad-
equate to conclude otter absence.
Mason and Macdonald (1991) observed
that only 80% of stretches where otter
is present are found positive with such
a survey distance. 
None of our three methods at the stretch
level do perfectly correct false nega-
tives in our data. Each of them overes-
timate otter occurrence. Their valida-
tion is incomplete with non-systematic
time series and they need complex GIS
algorithms and subjective parameters
adjustments. Predicting otter occur-
rence given Euclidian distance from
positive stretches is incorrect because
individuals travel preferentially in
rivers, which meander (Saavedra 2002;
Williams et al., 2002). The use of deci-
10
Janssens X.


sional distance is inappropriate for the
crossing of watershed limits and it is
probably too restrictive for the otter
that forages several tributaries of a
basin in a few days (Rosoux and Green
2004). Our cost-weighted distance
function highlights the part played by
not too steep watershed limits in otter
dispersal, but tends to overestimate the
crossing 
of 
some 
limits 
(e.g.
Tarnon/Gardons, Fig. 2, e). 
Basins of several tens kilometres long
seem to be more appropriate spatial
unit to analyse otter occurrence and
recovery from non-systematic surveys.
Individual movements are not confined
to short stretches of rivers and predic-
tions on a basin scale reflect more real-
istically the dispersal and settlement
process (Ruiz-Olmo et al., 1991; Ruiz-
Olmo et al., 2001). Otters should have
easily crossed the watershed limits
between the Tarn and Luech rivers and
between Lot and Altier rivers, shaped
by gently sloping areas (Defontaines
1999). They dispersed by swimming
from the Tarn to the Tarnon Rivers and
followed the Tarn to progressively
reach the rivers Jonte in 1995 and
Dourbie in 1997. Dispersers next
recolonised the Herault basin from
2002 and the Gardons between 2004
and 2005 (Fig. 2, c, f, i, l; Fig. 3). 
Which path did the otters follow to
reach the Mediterranean basins in the
South of the park, separated from the
northern basins by steep sloping water-
shed limits? A unique hypothetical
process is suggested for the recovery of
the Herault basins: the crossing of the
watershed limit from the Dourbie
basins (Fig. 3). Following small tribu-
taries, an otter would cover less than
500 m of land between these both
basins. We propose three hypothetical
paths of colonisation of the Gardons:
either from the North, i.e. through the
Tarnon or Mimente watershed limits
(Fig. 3, path a), either from the Luech
River by swimming via the Rhone
River (Fig. 3, path b), either from the
Southwest, i.e. through the Herault
watershed limits (Fig. 3, path c). To
assess all paths, we compare the dis-
tances they suppose that otters would
have covered to reach each basin (km)
with the time interval it passed before
the basins were actually colonised
(years). Distances are estimated from
the centroid of the basins of origin, i.e.
the upper Tarn basin, to the centroid of
8 colonised basins. The time interval
began in 1991, when the first otter sur-
vey in the Cevennes was performed.
Comparisons (Fig. 3) highlight that the
distances covered on our hypothetical
paths, including paths a, b or c, explain
respectively 56, 89 or 99 % of the vari-
ance of the observed colonisation time.
Since the beginning of otter survey in
Cevennes, it passed 14 years before
otters were observed in Gardons basins.
Path a suggests the crossing of only one
narrow watershed limit, which doesn’t
explain such long time interval. Path b
proposes that otters crossed a gently
sloping watershed limit and next swam
downstream and finally upstream along
a curve of more than 250 km long. This
should be easy for otter individuals, but
researches made by naturalists (pers.
comm.) along this potential long swim-
ming path didn’t result in the observa-
tion of otter signs. Path c finally
assumes that otters crossed two sharp
sloping watershed limits. Despite this
11
Recovery of  otters: a GIS-based model


hypothesis seems less probable for a
water-linked species like otter, its rate
of recovery of about 11 km a year is
comparable to the otter recolonisation
in other regions, e.g. 10 km a year in
the North of the Massif Central
(Bouchardy 1986; Rosoux et al., 1999)
or in Denmark (Christensen H., unpub-
12
Figure 3 - Left: Hypothetical colonisation paths, including variable paths (a, b and c)
towards Gardons basin. Right: Comparison between the distance that otters would have
covered to reach basins following each path (km) and the time before basins were actually
colonised (years).
Janssens X.


lished data). Further studies, e.g. genet-
ic ones, could validate this last hypoth-
esis.
In conclusion, watershed limits are
landscape features that impede otter
movements and dispersal. The ‘cost of
moving’ they induce is complex to
model and validate, especially with
incomplete and biased survey datasets.
In such context, the prediction of otter
occurrence on the scale of basins occu-
pied by 25-100 km of permanent rivers
can bring more relevant information to
analyse its distribution than on a more
local scale. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We 
gratefully 
acknowledge 
the
National Cevennes Park agents, P.
Baffie (Fisheries Council, CSP), the
ALEPE (Association Lozérienne pour
l’Etude et la Protection de l’Environ-
nement), the CISM (Institut de Calcul
Intensif et de Stockage de Masse) and
Eric Le Boulengé (Ecology and
Biogeography Unit) of the UCL
(Université Catholique de Louvain).
The National Fund for Scientific
Research (Belgium) funded this work
through a ‘research fellow’ grant (man-
dat d’aspirant FNRS) to X.J.
REFERENCES
Bouchardy C. 1986. La loutre. Sang de la
Terre, Mondeville , France, 174 pp.
Broyer J. and Erome G. 1982. Eléments
d'écologie de la loutre (Lutra lutra L.):
Premières données bibliographiques.
Bièvre, 4(1): 33-58.
Chanin P.R.F. 2003. Ecology of the
European Otter. Conserving Natura
2000 Rivers Ecology Series No. 10.
English Nature, Peterborough, 67 pp.
Defontaines P. 1999. Répartition de la
loutre - Lutra lutra L.- dans le sud-est
du Massif central. Bièvre, 16: 13-26.
Destre R., d'Andurain P., Fonderflick J. and
Parayre C. 2000. Faune sauvage de
Lozère. Les Vertébrés. Association
Lozérienne 
pour 
l'Etude 
et 
de
Protection 
de 
l'Environnement,
Balsiège, France, 256 pp.
Elmeros M. and Bussenius N. 2003.
Influence of selection of bank side on
the standard method for otter surveys.
IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin,
19: 67-74.
Erlinge S. 1967. Home range of the otter
Lutra lutra L. Oikos, 18: 186-209.
Erlinge S. 1968. Territoriality of the otter
Lutra lutra L. Oikos, 19: 81-98.
Fonderflick J., de Kermabon J., Libois R.,
Baffie P. and Tournebize T., 1995.
Evolution récente du statut de la loutre
dans le Parc National des Cévennes.
Cahier d'Ethologie, 15(2-3-4): 233-
238.
Green J., Green R. and Jefferies D.J. 1984.
A radio-tracking survey of otters Lutra
lutra on Perthshire river system. Lutra,
27: 85-145.
Guisan A. and Zimmermann N. E. 2000.
Predictive habitat distribution models
in ecology. Ecological Modelling, 135:
147-186.
Harris C.J. 1968. Otters. A study of the
Recent Lutrinae. Weidenfeld and
Nicolson, London, 397 pp.
Hutchings M.R. and White P.C.L. 2000.
Mustelid scent-marking in managed
ecosystems: implications for popula-
tion management. Mammal Review,
30(3-4): 157-169.
Kruuk H. 1995. Wild Otters. Predation and
Populations. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 290 pp.
Le Boulengé E., Legendre P., delaCourt C.,
Le Boulengé-Nguyen P. and Languy
13
Recovery of  otters: a GIS-based model


M. 1996. Microgeographic morpho-
logical differentiation in muskrats.
Journal of Mammalogy, 77(3): 684-
701.
Macdonald S.M. and Mason C.F. 1987.
Seasonal marking in an otter popula-
tion. Acta Theriologica, 32: 449-469.
Mason C. F. and Macdonald S. M., 1986.
Otters ecology and conservation.
Cambridge 
University 
Press,
Cambridge, 235 pp.
Mason C. F. and Macdonald S. M. 1991.
Assessment of otter (Lutra lutra) sur-
vey 
methods 
using 
spraints 
-
Proceedings V International Otter
Colloquium. Habitat, 6: 167-169.
Michelot J.L. and Bendelé R. 1995. Statut
de la loutre dans le bassin du Rhône et
le département de l'Ardèche. Cahier
d'Ethologie, 15(2-3-4): 223-232.
Prenda J. and Granado C.A. 1996. The rel-
ative influence of riparian habitat
structure and fish availability on otter
Lutra lutra L - sprainting activity in a
small 
Mediterranean 
catchment.
Biological Conservation, 76(1): 9-15.
Reuther C. 2004. On the way towards an
Otter 
Habitat 
Network 
Europe
(OHNE). Method and Results of an
Area Assessment on the European and
the German Level. Habitat, 15. pages?
Reuther C., Dolch D., Green R., Jahrl J.,
Jefferies 
D.J., 
Krekemeyer 
A.,
Kucerova 
M., 
Madsen 
A.B.,
Romanowski J., Roche K., Ruiz-Olmo
J., Teubner J. and Trindade A. 2000.
Surveying and monitoring distribution
and population trends of the Eurasian
otter (Lutra lutra). Guidelines and
evaluation of the Standard Method for
surveys as recommended by the
European section of the IUCN/SSC.
Otter Specialist Group. Habitat, 12: 1-
148.
Rosoux R. and Green J. 2004. La loutre.
Paris, 96 pp.
Rosoux R., Libois R. and de Bellefroid M.
1999. Rapport d'expertise: Programme
de conservation de la loutre d'Europe
dans la Réserve de Biosphère de
Trebon 
(République 
Tchèque).
Conseil de l'Europe, Strasbourg.
Ruiz-Olmo J., Jimenez J. and Lacomba I.
1991. Length of hydrographical basins
and population viability of the otter in
rivers in Eastern Spain. Habitat, 6:
255-258.
Ruiz-Olmo J., Saavedra D. and Jimenez J.
2001. Testing the surveys and visual
and track censuses of Eurasian otters
(Lutra lutra). Journal of Zoology,
London, 253: 359-369.
Saavedra 
D. 
2002. 
PhD 
thesis:
Reintroduction of the Eurasian otter
(Lutra lutra) in Muga and Fluvia
basins (North-Eastern Spain): viability,
development, monitoring and trends of
the new population. Departament de
Ciències Ambientals, Universitat de
Girona, Spain, 217 pp.
Scott M.J., Heglund P.J. and Morrison M.L.
2002. Predicting species occurrences.
Issues of accuracy and scale. Island
Press, Washington, 868 pp.
Sutherland W.J. 1996. Ecological census
techniques - A handbook. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 352 pp.
Vaisfeld M.A. 1996. The river otter in the
European North of Russia. Council of
Europe Publishing, Leeuwarden, 114
pp.
White P.C.L., McClean C.J. and Woodroffe
G.L. 2003. Factors affecting the suc-
cess of an otter (Lutra lutra) reinforce-
ment programme, as identified by post-
translocation monitoring. Biological
Conservation, 112(3): 363-371.
Williams T.M., Ben David M., Noren S.,
Rutishauer M., Macdonald K. and
Heyward W. 2002. Running energetics
of the North American river otter: do
short legs necessarily reduce efficiency
on land? Comparative Biochemistry
and Physiology A, 133: 203-212.
14
Janssens 


15


16
