--- 
source: 2006-2.pdf
--- 

 Reintroduction of the otter in NE Spain
191
REINTRODUCTION OF THE OTTER (Lutra lutra) IN
NORTHEAST SPAIN (GIRONA PROVINCE)
D. SAAVEDRA Y J. SARGATAL
Fundació Territori i Paisatge. Provença, 261-265 1er. 08008 Barcelona (dsaavedra@quercus.es)
ABSTRACT
The objective of the project is the reintroduction of the otter in the Aiguamolls de l’Empordà Natu-
ral Park and the Muga and Fluvià basins, and the promotion of river conservation through this emblematic
species. Since 1995, 32 individuals from Extremadura (SW Spain) and Asturias (NW Spain) have been
released. They have occupated most of the study area and there are already reproduction data.
Keywords: NE Spain, otter, radiotracking, reintroduction, translocation.
RESUMEN
Reintroducción de la nutria (Lutra lutra) en el nordeste de España (provincia de Girona)
 Este proyecto tiene como objetivo reintroducir la nutria en el Parque Natural de los Aiguamolls de
l’Empordà y en las cuencas de los ríos Muga y Fluvià, así como promover la conservación de los ríos a
través de esta especie emblemática. Desde 1995 se han soltado 32 individuos procedentes de Extremadura
y Asturias, que se han dispersado por la zona de estudio. Además, se dispone de datos de reproducción.
Palabras clave: NE España, nutria, radioseguimiento, reintroducción, translocación.
INTRODUCTION
The otter disappeared from Girona province (Catalonia, NE Spain) 15 years ago
due to hunting, pollution and habitat destruction (Delibes 1990; Ruiz-Olmo 1995;
Saavedra 1995). In 1993, a project was started in order to restore the disappeared
population because the possibilities of recolonization from other populations were
extremely low (Ruiz-Olmo and Delibes 1998) and the reintroduction of otters have
been successful in other countries as USA, UK or Sweden (Serfass et al. 1996, Wayre
1989, Sjöåsen 1997).
The reintroduction through translocation of wild animals was choose because
is desirable (UICN 1998) and there are healthy populations in certain parts of the
Iberian Peninsula (Delibes and Ruiz-Olmo 1998).
In 1994, a study was carried out (Saavedra 1995) in order to determine if the
Otter Project observed the guidelines for reintroductions proposed by the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN 1987; 1998). The
conclusions were the following:


Galemys 10 (nº especial), 1998
192
1. The Eurasian otter is classified as Vulnerable for its total distribution (IUCN
1990) and for Spain (Blanco and González 1992).
2. The reintroduction has been proposed in the Aiguamolls de l’Empordà Na-
tural Park and Muga and Fluvià basins, which are part of the original area of
distribution (Delibes 1990; Ruiz-Olmo and Aguilar 1995; Ruiz-Olmo 1995).
3. The causes of extinction were persecution (hunting, trapping), pollution and
habitat destruction (Ruiz-Olmo 1995; Saavedra 1995).
4. Extinction in the study area has been complete, with the last citation in 1984
(Delibes 1990). Between Muga and Fluvià basins and the nearest otter
populations there are several basins without otters, so spontaneous
recolonization is unlikely to occur (Ruiz-Olmo and Delibes 1998).
5. The proposed donor populations (from Extremadura, Galicia, Asturias and
Portugal) are healthy and increasing in number (Farinha et al. 1997, Ruiz-
Olmo and Delibes 1998).
6. Though there are no specific studies based on genetics, there are no significant
morphological differences between the Iberian otters (Ruiz-Olmo 1995). The
proposed donor populations are the nearest with enough individuals and live
in comparable mediterranean habitats.
7. The extension of the study area is 200,000 ha, with more than 600 km of
river and 3,000 ha of wetlands. Considering the densities found in Catalonia
(0,1-1,2 otters/km; Ruiz-Olmo 1995), there is enough habitat for a population
with a range between 60 and 720 animals. As in other mammal
reintroduction projects, the objective is to release 50 otters, because a
number smaller disposes a population to inbreeding depression (Gilpin
1987). Nevertheless, this number implies a isolated population that has been
decreasing until 50 individuals who are genetically closely related. In our
case, the 50 otters will come from different populations and will have a much
higher genetic variance.
8. The habitat is in good condition. Riparian and marsh vegetation are well
conserved in a major part of the area (Saavedra 1995). Fish biomass varied
between 0.6 and 351.9 gr/m2 (n=12) in  Zamora et al. 1996 study, with only
two sites (17%) with a biomass lower than 8 gr/m2, the minimum value
calculated to support an otter population in Mediterranean rivers (Ruiz-
Olmo 1995). The levels of organochlorine compounds in fish of the area are
in the order of those calculated in rivers of Catalonia (López-Martín et al.
1995). The levels of PCBs, the main compounds associated with the decline
of the otter, ranged between 81 and 136.4 µg/kg wet weight (95% CI, n=37),
with 41% of the sites with values higher than 110 µg/kg ww (Mateo et al.


 Reintroduction of the otter in NE Spain
193
1995). The fishes with levels lower than this ‘level of concern’ live in
catalonian rivers with healthy otter populations (Ruiz-Olmo 1995, Ruiz-
Olmo and López-Martín 1994).
 9. The human local population is mainly in favour of the reintroduction, because
the otter does not negatively affect the interests of any economic group in the
area (Saavedra 1995). In Spain it’s a fully protected species from 1973.
10. The project has the permission and support of the government agencies.
The main objectives of the Otter Project are:
- The restoration of an erradicated population.
- The promotion of river and wetland conservation through an emblematic
species.
STUDY AREA AND METHODS
The reintroduction project is being carried out in the Muga and Fluvià river
basins, a territory which includes aproximately 2,000 km2. Both are low headwaters
Mediterranean rivers with irregular water regime, fed by surface waters (rainfall)
and lower flow typified by a low absolute volume. The Muga basin presents a surface
of 853.78 km2 and a average flow of 2.44 m2/seg. The total length of its main branch
is 64.7 km. The Fluvià river is 97.2 km long, with a mean flow of 1.27 m2/seg and a
basin surface of 1123.58 km2 (Brusi 1992). Both rivers flow into Aiguamolls de
l’Empordà wetlands, with 4,800 ha protected as Natural Park and 800 ha as Strict
Reserve (figure 1).
The riparian forests include Populus alba, Fraxinus angustifolia and Alnus glu-
tinosa, but in many places has been replaced with plantations of trees, with Populus
nigra and Platanus x hybrida. Helophitic and halophil vegetation (Phragmites sp.,
Typha sp., Arthrocnemum sp.) occurs on the wetlands and coastal zones (Folch and
Franquesa 1984).
The fish community is mainly represented by Ciprinidae, with a great proportion
of introduced species (Carp, Roach, Rudd) and Anguillidae (Eel). In the upper course
Trout is found and near the mouth of both rivers and in the wetlands some marine
species (Mullet, Sea bass) are common (Zamora et al. 1996).
The density of population is c.60 habitants/km2, but increases in the coast
during the summer period. The main activities in the study area are the agriculture
and the tourism, with more than 400,000 tourist places. The main roads pass
through the area from north to south, connecting Spain with the rest of Europe.
(Cals 1987, El País 1993).


Galemys 10 (nº especial), 1998
194
Figure 1. Geographical area of the reintroduction program
Área geográfica del programa de reintroducción
The only semi-aquatic mustelid present in the area is the polecat (Mustela
putorius) though there are some observations of American mink (Mustela vison),
coming from a nearby population (Ruiz-Olmo and Aguilar 1995, Ruiz-Olmo et al. 1997).
The reintroduction protocol was agreed between the government and a group
of biologists and veterinaries. The project is coordinated by a biologist. The protocol
is similar to the Pennsylvania River Otter Reintroduction Project (Serfass 1996) and
has the following steps:
1. Identification of suitable places to set the traps.
2. Trapping using leghold traps (1.5 Softcatch Traps, Woodstream Corporation, USA).
Every time an otter is captured:
3. Anesthesia injection through a blowpipe. Anesthesics used are ketamine (0.05
mg/kg) and metedomidine (0.05 mg/kg).
4. Trap removal, sex determination, wound inspection and treatment, antibiotic
injection and body condition calculation. The body condition is used to


 Reintroduction of the otter in NE Spain
195
choose the animals prepared to resist the stress of handling and implanting,
collecting generally the otters with K≥0.90. The old individuals and pregnant
or lactating females are immediately released.
Kmale  = Weight(kg) / 5.91 TotalLenght(m) 2.76
Kfemale  = Weight(kg) / 5.36 Total Lenght(m) 2.61  (Ruiz-Olmo 1995)
5. Neuroleptic injections (Haloperidol and Trilafon)
6. Reversal by Antisedans (0.05 ml/kg) and introduction into the transport cage.
7. Transport to Barcelona Zoo by car during the night or by airplane.
8. Two-four weeks stay in Barcelona Zoo veterinary services where veterinary
evaluations and the intraperitoneal implantation of a transmitter are done,
following the protocols described in Fernandez et al. 1997 and Hoover 1984.
9. Release in the study area.
10. Radiotracking. The transmitters used are from Advanced Telemetry Systems
(100 and 300 days), Telonics (one year) and Wagener (one year), with frequencies
between 150.000 and 151.999 MHz. The receivers used are from Advanced
Telemetry Systems (R4000 and R2100). The individuals are radiolocalised at
least once every two weeks until the animal is lost or found dead.
RESULTS
Until 31/12/98 32 otters have been released, 13 males and 19 females. The
implantation of transmitters in most of the otters (94%,n=32) has been essential for
supplying knowledge about the new population’s adaptation, movements and
mortality (table 1). The mean radiotracking period was 131 days (2-597 days, n=
30). At least two females have bred (Saavedra and Sargatal 1996, 1997), in one case
the animal’s transmitter still worked and in the other a direct observation of an otter
with a cub was made. Post-release mortality has been caused (19%, n=6) mainly by
car crashing (n=3), but also drowned in fyke nets (n=1) or irrigation channels syphons
(n=1)  (Ruiz-Olmo et al. 1997).
The otters reintroduced have occuped in three years most of Aiguamolls Natu-
ral Park, most of Fluvià and Muga rivers and many tributaries (table 2, figures 2, 3
and 4). Some animals have travelled from one basin to the other using Aiguamolls
wetlands as a corridor and one animal reached a basin out of the reintroduction
area. Dispersal and establishment pattern has been similar to swedish reintroduction
project, with different movements depending on wether other otters where present
or absent (Sjöåsen 1997). Female home ranges after establishment are usually
smaller than male’s and are included in male’s home range. Core areas tend to be
segregated and any disappearance is quickly occupied (Saavedra et al. 1997).


Galemys 10 (nº especial), 1998
196
TABLE 1
Otters released in the study area
Nutrias liberadas en la zona de estudio
The first studies of feeding habits (using spraint contents) have shown that otters
main prey are fish (Angullidae, Cyprinidae and Mugilidae) and crayfish
(Procambarus clarkii).
The Environmental Education Program is essential for the achievement of the
Otter Project’s second objective: the promotion of the conservation of rivers and
wetlands using an emblematic species.
The program began with the creation of a tale for children (The Return of the
Otter, Saavedra et al. 1995) along with other pedagogical tools.
Since the end of 1998, 5000 schoolboys and girls have been visited by the Otter
Project educators, bringing the message of river and wetlands conservation using
the otter and the following reasoning: “If the otter can live in this river, it is surely in
good enough condition for the other animals, for the plants and for the people. But
people need work in order to have their rivers clean and healthy again”.
For this reason we are promoting the creation of local groups (on every village
in the area) called “Otter Groups”, which act voluntarily to conserve and restore
their nearest stretch of river, removing rubbish, planting trees, preparing exhibitions
Sex
Sexo
Captured
Capturado
Released
Soltado
Died
Muerto
Lost
Perdido
Tracking period
Periodo seguim.
Remarks
Observaciones
F
16/10/95
14/11/95
18/12/95
 35 days
drowned in fyke net
M
21/10/95
01/12/95
09/07/97
587 days
M
05/11/95
01/12/95
27/06/96
210 days
unknown causes
F
06/02/96
01/03/96
19/10/96
233 days
breed in august’96
F
06/03/96
21/03/96
16/10/97
597 days
breed in autumn’97
F
21/09/96
21/10/96
13/12/96
 53 days
M
02/10/96
21/10/96
25/07/97
279 days
F
09/10/96
28/10/96
13/06/97
229 days
M
18/10/96
04/11/96
19/05/97
194 days
M
23/10/96
11/11/96
30/04/97
170 days
F
26/10/96
11/11/96
17/12/96
 37 days
F
01/11/96
02/12/96
25/01/97
 55 days
runned over
F
01/11/96
02/12/96
13/12/96
 12 days
Cub (2.6kg)
F
01/11/96
02/12/96
10/12/96
  9 days
Cub (2.3kg)
M
03/11/96
26/11/96
17/12/96
 22 days
M
20/11/96
10/12/96
11/12/96
  2 days
runned over
M
22/11/96
14/07/97
without transmitter
M
25/11/96
27/12/96
30/05/97
155 days
F
25/11/96
27/12/96
13/01/97
 18 days
drowned in a irrigation channel siphon
M
08/05/97
21/06/97
without transmitter
F
25/02/97
08/05/97
13/06/97
53 days
M
04/11/97
10/12/97
08/01/98
31 days
M
16/11/97
16/12/97
17/02/98
63 days
M
13/05/98
08/06/98
207 days
(until 31/12/98)
F
26/08/98
18/09/98
105 days
(until 31/12/98)
F
25/08/98
18/09/98
105 days
(until 31/12/98)
F
02/09/98
18/09/98
105 days
(until 31/12/98)
F
01/09/98
02/10/98
91 days
(until 31/12/98)
F
27/08/98
05/10/98
88 days
(until 31/12/98)
F
24/09/98
15/10/98
08/11/98
25 days
runned over
F
24/09/98
15/10/98
78 days
(until 31/12/98)
F
27/09/98
15/10/98
78 days
(until 31/12/98)


 Reintroduction of the otter in NE Spain
197
and events about nature protection and so on. All these activities have the economic
support of private sponsorship.
TABLE 2
Dispersal of the new otter population in Aiguamolls Natural park and Muga and Fluvià basins
Dispersión de la población de nutria en el Parque Natural de los Aiguamolls y en las cuencas de los ríos
Muga y Fluvià
Figure 2. Dispersal of the new otter population (number of released otters)
Dispersión de la nueva población de nutrias (número de nutrias liberadas)
Figure 3. Dispersal of the new otter population (kilometers of river)
 Dispersión de la nueva población de nutrias (kilómetros de río)
Period
Periodo
number of days
número de días
number of released otters
número de nutrias soltadas
kilometers of river
kilómetros de río
hectares of wetland
hectáreas de marisma
14/11/95-31/12/95
47
3
0
500
14/11/95-31/12/96
413
18
135
940
14/11/95-31/12/97
778
23
290
2200
14/11/95-31/12/98
1143
32
320
2500


Galemys 10 (nº especial), 1998
198
Figure 4. Dispersal of the new otter population (hectares of wetland)
Dispersión de la nueva población de nutrias (hectareas de humedales)
DISCUSSION
Until now, the reintroduction project has been successful because practically
all the otters translocated  have acclimated to the new habitat and the post-release
mortality has been due to accidents and no by human persecution.
In the next months the release of otters will continue, until a total of 50
individuals, all implanted with transmitters. The creation of Otter Groups will
continue and so the restoration activities in rivers, lakes and marshes. The end of
the project is planned for the year 2000, but the evolution of the new population
(through otter surveys and visual censuses) will continue some more years.
REFERENCES
BLANCO, J. C. AND J. L. GONZÁLEZ (1992). Libro rojo de los vertebrados de España. ICONA. Madrid.
BRUSI, D. (1992). Les aigües. In: El medi natural. (Pallí, L. & Brusi, D. eds). Diputació de Girona
– Universitat de Girona. Girona.
CALS, J. (1987). L’Alt Empordà: recursos i estructura econòmica. Caixa d’Estalvis de Catalunya.
Barcelona.
EL PAÍS (1993). Atlas de España. Diario El País. Barcelona.
FARINHA, N., E. FLORENCIO AND A. TRINDADE (1997). Distribuiçao da lontra em Portugal continental.
Actas de las III Jornadas Españolas de Conservación y Estudio de Mamíferos: 96. SECEM.
FERNÁNDEZ, J., D. SAAVEDRA AND J. RUIZ-OLMO (1997). Aspectos veterinarios en el programa de
reintroducción de la nutria en los Aiguamolls de l’Empordà (NE de Girona). Ponencias y
comunicaciones del I Congreso Internacional de Medio Ambiente y Veterinaria: 401-406.
Colección Monografías. Junta de Extremadura. Mérida.
FOLCH, R. AND T. FRANQUESA (1984). Història Natural dels Països Catalans, vol. 7 Vegetació.
Enciclopèdia Catalana. Barcelona.


 Reintroduction of the otter in NE Spain
199
GILPIN, E. (1987). Spatial structure and population vulnerability. In: Viable populations for
conservation. (Soulé,M. E. ed.). Cambridge University Press. UK.
HOOVER, J. P. (1984). Surgical implantation of radiotelemetry devices in American river otters.
JAVMA, 185 (11): 1317-1320.
IUCN (1987). The IUCN position statement on translocation of living organisms. Gland,
Switzerland.
IUCN (1990). 1990 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland and
Cambridge, UK.
IUCN (1998). IUCN Guidelines for re-introductions. Gland, Switzerland.
LÓPEZ-MARTÍN,J. M., J. RUIZ-OLMO AND A. BORRELL (1995). Levels of organochlorine compounds
in freshwater fish from Catalonia, NE Spain. Chemosphere, 31(6): 3523-3535.
MATEO, R., D. SAAVEDRA AND R. GUITART (1995). Organochlorine residues in fish from Fluvià and
Muga rivers, Catalonia, NE Spain: implications for Otter Lutra lutra reintroduction.
Unpublished.
RUIZ-OLMO, J. (1995). Estudio bionómico de la nutria (Lutra lutra) en aguas continentales de la
Península Ibérica. Thesis. University of Barcelona.
RUIZ-OLMO, J. AND A. AGUILAR (1995). Els grans mamífers de Catalunya. Lynx edicions. Barcelona.
RUIZ-OLMO, J. AND M. DELIBES (1998). La nutria (Lutra lutra) en España: sondeo de 1994-96.
SECEM. Málaga.
RUIZ-OLMO, J., M. DELIBES, D. SAAVEDRA AND S. C. ZAPATA (1997). Morfometría externa, demografía
y causas de mortalidad de la nutria en la Península Ibérica. Actas de las III Jornadas
Españolas de Conservación y Estudio de Mamíferos: 109.
RUIZ-OLMO, J. AND J. M. LÓPEZ-MARTÍN (1994). Otters and pollution in North-east Spain. In:
Seminar on the conservation of the European Otter (Lutra lutra): 144-146. Council of
Europe, Strasbourg.
RUIZ-OLMO, J., S. PALAZÓN, F. BUENO, C. BRAVO, I. MUNILLA AND R. ROMERO (1997). Distribution, status
and colonization of the American mink Mustela vison in Spain. Journal of Wildlife
Research, 2(1): 30-36.
SAAVEDRA, D. (1995). Estudio de viabilidad de la reintroducción de la nutria en los Aiguamolls
de l’Empordà y cuencas de los ríos Muga y Fluvià. Unpublished report of the Aiguamolls
de l’Empordà Natural Park.
SAAVEDRA, D., J. SARGATAL AND T. LLOBET (1995). El retorn de la llúdriga. Publication of Department
of Environment, Government of Catalonia. Barcelona.
SAAVEDRA, D. AND J. SARGATAL (1996). Memoria de la reintroducción piloto de nutrias (Lutra lutra)
en los Aiguamolls de l’Empordà. Unpublished report of the Aiguamolls de l’Empordà
Natural Park.
SAAVEDRA, D. AND J. SARGATAL (1997). Reintroducción de la nutria en la provincia de Girona. Actas
de las III Jornadas Españolas de Conservación y Estudio de Mamíferos: 113.
SERFASS, T. L., R. P. BROOKS, T. J. SWIMLEY, L. M. RYMON AND A. H. HAYDEN (1996). Considerations for
capturing, handling and translocating river otters. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 24 (1): 25-
31.
SJÖÅSEN, T. (1997). Movements and establishment of reintroduced European otters Lutra lutra.
Journal of Applied Ecology, 34: 1070-1080.
ZAMORA, L., D. SAAVEDRA AND R. MORENO (1996). Stock assesment, biomass and fish production
in two mediterranean basins (NE Spain). Limnética:12 (1):47-58.
