--- 
source: 2006-14.pdf
--- 

CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE MUSEUM OF PALEONTOLOGY 
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 
VOL. 2 8 ,  NO. 12, PP. 289-319 
December 15, 1992 
FUNCTIONAL AND BEHAVIORAL IMPLICATIONS OF VERTEBRAL STRUCTURE 
IN PACHYAENA OSSZFRAGA (MAMMALIA, MESONYCIZIA) 
XIAOYUAN ZHOU, WILLIAM J. SANDERS, AND PHILIP D. GINGERICH 
MUSEUM OF PALEONTOLOGY 
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 
ANN ARBOR 


CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE MUSEUM OF PALEONTOLOGY 
Philip D. Gingerich, Director 
This series of contributions from the Museum of Paleontology is a medium for publication 
of papers based chiefly on collections in the Museum. When the number of pages issued is 
sufficient to make a volume, a title page and a table of contents will be sent to libraries on the 
mailing list, and to individuals on request. A list of the separate issues may also be obtained 
by request. Correspondence should be directed to the Museum of PaleontoIogy, The University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1079. 
VOLS. 2-28. Parts of volumes may be obtained if available. Price lists are available upon 
inquiry. 


FUNCTIONAL AND BEHAVIORAL IMPLICATIONS OF VERTEBRAL STRUCTURE 
IN PACHYAENA OSSIFRAGA (MAMMALIA, MESONYCHIA) 
BY 
XIAOYUAN ZHOU, WILLIAM J. SANDERS, AND PHILIP D. GINGERICH 
Abstract. - Virtually the entire vertebral column of the early Eocene mesonychid 
Pachyaena ossifraga is represented in three partial skeletons: UM 94783, 
UM 95074, and YPM-PU 14708. Lengths and diameters of associated long 
bones indicate that the body mass of P. osslfraga was about 60-70 kg. 
Comparison of vertebrae of P. oss~fraga to those of extant mammals of similar 
size contributes to understanding vertebral function and locomotor behavior 
in Pachyaena. 
The vertebral column of Pachyaena ossifraga includes 7 cervical, 12 
thoracic, 7 lumbar, 3 sacral, and more than 15 caudal vertebrae. The tenth 
thoracic vertebra is both diaphragmatic and anticlinal. 
The most salient 
vertebral characteristics include a strong neural spine on the axis and very 
long spinous processes on anterior thoracic vertebrae, indicating powerful 
neck musculature to balance the head and anchor the shoulder. 
Lower 
thoracic and lumbar vertebrae have features stiffening the lower back, 
including interlocking revolute zygapophyses and craniocaudally lengthened 
neural spines. 
These limited extension of the lower back and suggest a 
"dilocomotory dorsostable" pattern of locomotion in Pachyaena like that found 
in large ungulates today. The vertebral column remained relatively rigid 
during running, and the tail acted as a counterbalance. Pachyaena and other 
large mesonychids are interpreted as cursorial carrion-feeders. 
INTRODUCTION 
Pachyaena is the best known early Eocene genus of the family Mesonychidae, a group of 
holarctic early Cenozoic condylarthran mammals. Pachyaena was first described from North 
America, but it has also been found in Europe and Asia. The genus was named by E. D. Cope 
in 1874. The type species, Pachyaena osszfraga, the species analyzed here, was originally 
based on a single isolated upper molar (Cope, 1874, 1877; the type is USNM 1096). Cope 
initially regarded Pachyaena as a new creodont, but later synonymized Pachyaena with 
Mesonyx and included P. osslfraga as a distinct species Mesonyx osszfragus (Cope, 1881, 


290 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
1882). H. F. Osborn (in Osborn and Wortman, 1892) recognized that Pachyaena differed from 
Mesonyx in retaining a full complement of three upper molars and he returned "M. oss~fragus" 
to Pachyaena, including both in Cope's family Mesonychidae. Mesonychids are now variously 
classified as a family, superfamily, or suborder (e.g., Mesonychia of Van Valen, 1969) within 
the order Condylarthra, or they are classified as an independent archaic order of their own 
(Van Valen's name Mesonychia is generally used). 
Cope (1884, p. 264; 1885, p. 362) described two partial skeletons of "Mesonyx oss~ji-agus" 
from the Bighorn Basin. The better of the two, AMNH 4262, included a partial skull with 
lower jaws and associated limb bones, alj intermingled with postcranial elements of 
Phenacodus. The other partial skeleton included an axis vertebra and two ungual phalanges. 
Cope noted that the skull of AMNH 4262 was about the size of a grizzly bear skull. He 
described two thoracic vertebrae as being distinctive in having centra with oblique and slightly 
opisthocoelous articular faces, and in having a strong angular inferior median ridge or keel. 
In addition, Cope described forelimb bones (erroneously including humeri that Matthew, 1909, 
later recognized belong to Phenacodus) and hind limb elements that do not concern us here. 
He recognized that Pachyaena had ungual phalanges with a narrow, fissured, hoof-like distal 
margin. Cope (1884, 1885) made the first attempt at a life restoration of Pachyaena oss~fraga 
("Mesonyx osstfragus"). Cope's assessment is so colorful that it is worth quoting in full: 
RESTORATION.-From the preceding investigation we can form a general idea of the form 
and proportions of the Mesonyx osslfragus. We can depict an animal as large as a large-sized 
American black bear, with a long stout tail, and a wide head as large as that of a grizzly 
bear. The fore limbs are so much shorter than the hind limbs that the animal customarily 
sat on its haunches when on land. In walking, its high rump and low withers would give it 
somewhat the figure of a huge rabbit. Its neck was about as long as that of an average dog. 
Its tread was plantigrade, and its claws like those of various rodents, intermediate between 
hoofs and claws. The animal, to judge from its otter-like humerus, was a good swimmer, 
although there is nothing specially adapted for aquatic life in the other bones of its limbs. 
Its teeth, on the other hand are of the simple construction of the mammals which have a diet 
largely composed of fishes. We cannot but consider this animal as one of the most singular 
which the Eocene period possessed. In size it was not exceeded by any other flesh-eater of 
the period, but was equaled by the Protopsalis tigrinus. 
[Cope, 1885, p. 3731 
Cope was clearly misled by the humeri he had available, and he gave no evidence for claims 
regarding the length of the neck, the length and stoutness of the tail, or the plantigrade tread. 
Subsequently, Boule (1903) too interpreted the feet of Pachyaena gigantea as bear-like and 
plantigrade, but Matthew (1915) described more complete remains of the feet of P. ossrfraga 
and concluded that this species was digitigrade. 
Cope (1884) proposed that Mesonyx (including Pachyaena oss~ji-aga) chewed hard 
substances, and considered the canine teeth to indicate that mesonychids fed on turtles. Boule 
(1903) described Pachyaena as a carnivore, large-headed but lacking strong jaw musculature, 
with feet poorly fit for grasping, let alone ripping or tearing, and he regarded Pachyaena as 
a hyaena-like carrion-feeder eating principally the soft parts of animals. Osborn (1910, p. 126) 
described Pachyaena as a "giant carnivore or omnivore, with blunt, rounded cusps adapted to 
devouring decaying flesh." Scott (1913, p. 560) described Pachyaena as having "extremely 
massive teeth" and noted that it "was not improbably a camon-feeder of hyaena-like habits." 
Matthew (1915, p. 85) reacted to Scott's characterization and argued that mesonychid teeth are 
too blunt to be useful in cutting flesh or tendons, and the jaws are too long and weak to be 
useful in crushing bones. He suggested instead that mesonychids may have fed on freshwater 
mollusks or some similar food that involved a great deal of wear of the cusps without entailing 
any great strength of the jaw. Matthew regarded cursorial specializations in Mesonychidae as 
a means of escaping carnivorous predators. Szalay and Gould (1966) studied the teeth and 
appendicular skeleton of Mesonychidae and considered Pachyaena gracilis to be a fast-running 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
"advanced carnivore," while P. gigantea was an "omnivore-carnivore" (P. ossifraga was not 
explicitly classified, but it was earlier grouped with P. gracilis on the basis of size). 
Mesonychids are usually regarded as carnivorous mammals of some kind because they have 
large canine teeth and bluntly pointed upper and lower cheek teeth, but they are unusual among 
carnivorous mammals in lacking shearing carnassial teeth and in having hoofed feet. 
As 
outlined above, there are three distinct hypotheses concerning the feeding behavior and 
ecological role of Pachyaena and other Mesonychidae. Szalay and Gould regarded some 
Pachyaena and other mesonychids as advanced carnivores. Boule, Osborn, and Scott regarded 
Pachyaena and other mesonychids as camon-feeders of hyaena-like habits. Cope (1884) and 
Matthew (1915) regarded mesonychids as fish, turtle, or mollusk eaters. 
The ecological role of Pachyaena and other mesonychids is important because Van Valen 
(1966) established Mesonychidae as the land mammals most likely to have given rise to marine 
cetaceans, and some knowledge of ancestral adaptations is necessary for a full understanding 
of the shift from terrestrial to aquatic adaptive zones. Several well-preserved partial skeletons 
of Pachyaena osszji-uga have been found in recent years in the Willwood Formation of the Big 
Horn and Clarks Fork basins in northwestern Wyoming. Previous authors have examined the 
teeth and the feet of mesonychids to understand their feeding and locomotor behavior. Our 
approach is complementary in focusing on the functional and behavioral implications of 
vertebral structure in Pachyaena. 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Institutional abbreviations used in this paper are as follows: 
AMNH 
- American Museum of Natural History, New York 
UM 
- University of Michigan Museum of Paleontology, Ann Arbor 
USNM 
- U.S. National Museum of Natural History, Washington 
YPM-PU - Princeton collection at Yale Peabody Museum, New Haven 
BODY SIZE OF PACHYAENA OSSIFRAGA 
The body size of Pachyaena ossifraga can be estimated from long bone lengths and 
diameters, and weight estimates based on these elements are listed in Table 1. It is interesting 
to note that weight estimates based on long bone diameters are consistently higher than weights 
based on long bone lengths, meaning that P. ossifraga was a little more heavily built than is 
typical for living mammals. The mean of individual estimates based on each element is about 
62 kg, while multiple regression based on all elements yields an estimate of about 69 kg. Thus 
it is reasonable to consider the weight of P. ossifraga to have been about 60-70 kg. Cranial 
and postcranial elements of Pachyaena osszfraga vary a little in size from individual to 
individual, but these do not group discretely and there is no evidence of sexual dimorphism in 
body size. 
VERTEBRAL STRUCTURE 
Vertebral structure provides important clues to the locomotion of mammals. The relative 
sizes of vertebrae and vertebral regions, shapes of articular surfaces, and sizes and orientations 
of vertebral processes are all related to vertebral function and locomotor behavior (Hatt, 1932; 
Slijper, 1946, 1947; Smith and Savage, 1955; Howell, 1965; Gambaryan, 1974; Hildebrand, 
1988; and Taylor, 1989). The lower thoracic and lumbar regions are especially important in 


X. ZHOU ET AL. 
TABLE 1- Body size determination for Eocene mesonychid Pachyaena ossifraga based on mean 
measurements of four partial skeletons: UM 94783, UM 95074, YPM-PU 13064, and 
YPM-PU 14708. Predictions computed using program in Gingerich (1990). 
Measurement 
Predicted 
95 % Prediction limits 
Pachyaena ossifaga 
(mm) 
body mass (g) 
Min (g) 
Max (g) 
Humerus length 
Ulna length 
Metacarpal length 
Femur length 
Tibia length 
Metatarsal length 
Humerus diameter 
Ulna diameter 
Metacarpal diameter 
Femur diameter 
Tibia diameter 
Metatarsal diameter 
N, geom. mean, min., max. 
Multiple regression 
A11 species: 
I I L&D- 
69,397 
6 L- 
42,083 
(Artiodactyla removed): 
(57,109) 
(32,796) 
this regard (Slijper, 1946). Cursorial mammals run either by holding the vertebral column 
rigid or by coordinating vertebral movements with pelvic and limb excursions to increase stride 
length during running (Hildebrand, 1959; Gambaryan, 1974), and this affects both energetic 
efficiency and running speed. 
The vertebral column includes all of the axial postcranial bones of the neck, trunk, and tail 
(Fig. 1). The principal landmarks are the thorux bearing ribs in the upper trunk, and the 
sacrum articulating with the pelvis in the lower trunk. Thus the vertebral column of mammals 
can be divided into five regions: cervix, thorax, lumbus, sacrum, and cauda. According to 
Flower (1885), most mammals have 7 cervical vertebrae, 12-15 thoracics, 5-7 lumbars, 3-4 
sacrals, and 7-27 caudal vertebrae. 
Individual vertebrae may include as many as five distinct components (Gadow, 1933): 
(1) 
A cylindrical body or centrum. Successive centra articulate at their posterior and anterior 
ends, respectively, which are complementary in shape. 
(2) 
A neural arch. This has a left and a right pedicle arising from the centrum, continuing 
as a left and a right lamina that join dorsally and enclose the spinal cord. A neural arch 
usually has pre- and postzygapophyses that articulate with complementary zygapophyses 
of adjacent vertebrae. 
(3) 
Midline processes. These may include a neural spine rising dorsally from the neural 
arch, and a hypapophysis (or hypapophyses) descending ventrally from the base of the 
centrum. 
(4) 
Transverse processes. These are paired and arise from the neural arch or the centrum, 
articulating with ribs and/or providing muscle attachment. When divided, transverse 
processes include a superior dicrpophysis and an inferior pnrcrpophysis on each side. 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
293 
Sacrum 
<
G
 
- 
, 
-2 
r 
. r  
2. - 
Hernal Arches 
D~aahragrnat~c 
aqe Aq'~cl~nal 
Vertebra 
FIG. 1-Vertebral column of early Eocene Pachyaena ossifaga in right lateral view. Composite column 
is reconstructed primarily from UM 95074, with additions from UM 94783 and YPM-PU 14708. 
Note large neural spine on C2, high neural spines on anterior thoracic vertebrae, coincident position 
of diaphragmatic vertebraand anticlinal vertebraat T10, anteroposteriorly long apices of lumbar neural 
spines limiting sagittal extension, and robust caudal vertebrae. 
(5) Accessory or oblique processes. 
These are paired, and may include an anteriorly- 
projecting metapophysis and a posteriorly-projecting anapophysis. 
Mammals, as a rule, have a first cervical vertebra with no real body, and it is essentially all 
neural arch and transverse processes. In contrast, posterior caudal vertebrae are all centrum 
with no neural arch and little in the way of midline processes, transverse processes, or 
accessory processes. Thus there is considerable variation throughout the vertebral column. 
The relative sizes and shapes of centra, neural arches, midline processes, transverse processes, 
and accessory processes are all importsnt for interpreting how the column functions as a whole. 
Most presacral centra of Pachyaena ossrfiaga are opisthocoelous to some degree, meaning 
that the anterior or cranial surface of the centrum is slightly convex and the posterior or caudal 
surface of the centrum is shallowly concave. In life, adjacent vertebral centra are held together 
with elastic fibrous connective tissue, and motion is further controlled by muscles and by 
zygapophyseal articulations. We follow Osborn (1900) in using the term revolute to describe 
interlocking zygapophyses with complex sigmoid articular surfaces on posterior thoracic and 
lumbar vertebrae. 
VERTEBRAE OF PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
Pachyaena oss~fraga has 7 cervicals (abbreviated C and numbered C1-C7), 12 thoracics 
(abbreviated T and numbered TI-T12), 7 lumbars (abbreviated L and numbered L1-L7), 3 
sacrals fused together (abbreviated S and denoted S 1-3), and more than 15 caudals (abbreviated 
Ca and numbered Cal-Cal5; the total number of caudals is not known in Pachyaena). 
Descriptions in this paper are based mainly on three specimens: UM 94783, UM 95074, 
and YPM-PU 14708. UM 94783 comes from McCullough Peaks locality MP-195 in the 


X. ZHOU ET AL. 
northern Bighorn Basin and includes an atlas, a good series of posterior cervical and anterior 
thoracic vertebrae, some lumbars, and several caudals. The centra of these are little deformed, 
but they are corroded and most lack neural spines and accessory processes. UM 95074 from 
McCullough Peaks locality MP-201 includes the most complete series of vertebrae known for 
Pachyaena osslfraga. These retain good surface detail and most spines and processes, but 
centra are compressed laterally due to the pressure of burial and this has probably affected 
some width measurements. Finally, YPM-PU 14708 from the McCullough Peaks south of 
Powell, Wyoming, includes C1-C3 in articulation, T12, a good series of lumbars, the sacrum 
in articulation with the pelvis, and a good series of caudals with hemal arches attached. These 
vertebrae are well preserved and little distorted, with most processes intact. 
Measurements of the three vertebral series, UM 94783, UM 95074, and YPM-PU 14708, 
appear in Tables 2, 3, and 4. Measurements of vertebrae of the extant hyaena Crocuta 
crocuta, which is similar in body size to Pachyaena, are listed in Table 5 for comparison. All 
measurements are in mm. The length of the centrum is measured from the center of the cranial 
articular surface of the body to the center of the caudal articular surface. The cranial and 
caudal widths are the maximum widths of the cranial and caudal surfaces. The cranial or 
caudal heights of the centrum are measured from the center of the dorsal margin of the centrum 
to the center of the ventral margin of each articular surface. The width and height of the neural 
canal are measured internally at the cranial end. The length of each pedicle is measured as its 
smallest craniocaudal diameter. Finally, neural spine height is measured from the dorsal neural 
canal at the posterior margin of the neural arch to the top of the neural spine. 
Cervical Vertebrae 
There are seven cervical or neck vertebrae, numbered C1 through C7, in Pachyaena 
osszfraga. The atlas (Cl) articulates directly with the skull, and the atlas and axis (C2) are 
distinctive in ways that facilitate motion of the cranium relative to the neck and tank. 
Remaining cervical vertebrae have more typical centra and neural arches, and additional 
processes not found on C1 and C2. C3-C7 differ from all other vertebrae of P. oss~fraga in 
having centra with anterior and posterior articular surfaces oriented obliquely relative to the 
craniocaudal or long axis of the centrum. The dorsal surface of the centrum projects farther 
cranially than the ventral surface anteriorly, and the ventral surface projects farther caudally 
than the dorsal surface posteriorly. In life, this oblique orientation of articular surfaces places 
the anterior articular surface of each centrum dorsally above the level of its posterior articular 
surface, thus raising the neck anteriorly. This is undoubtedly related to an habitual posture in 
which skull is held above the level of the thorax, but would not have prevented lowering of the 
head. 
C1 (Atlas; UM 94783; YPM-PU 14708).-The 
atlas is essentially all neural arch and 
transverse processes. Anteriorly, there are deeply concave articular surfaces for the occipital 
condyles of the skull. Posteriorly, there are shallowly concave, paired, and well-separated 
articular surfaces for the axis. Ventrally, the internal surface of the atlas is excavated to 
accommodate the dens of the axis, and there is a well developed posteriorly-projecting 
hypapophysis. There is no neural spine. The transverse processes are wide and wing-like, as 
in modern carnivores. There is a simple transversely-oriented intervertebral foramen piercing 
the anterodorsal surface of the neural arch on each side for exit of the first spinal nerve, and 
there is a larger anteroposteriorly-oriented canal penetrating each transverse process that camed 
the vertebral artery. This vertebrarterial canal is about 4-5 mm in diameter in YPM-PU 14708. 
The functional length of the atlas, measured as the minimum thickness of bone separating 
occipital condyles of the skull from the anterior articular surfaces of the axis in life, is about 
9.8 mm. The anterior width measured across the cranial condylar articulations is 65.2 mm. 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
295 
TABLE 2- Measurements of cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and caudal vertebrae of early Eocene 
Pachyaena ossfraga, based on U M  94783. Measurements in mm. 
Centrum 
Neural Canal 
Pedicle length 
Spine 
Vertebra 
LEN' 
CRW 
CRH 
CAW 
CAH 
CRW 
CRH 
Left 
Right 
NSH 
Cal 
-- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
Ca2 
--- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--. -- 
-- 
-- 
--- 
Ca3 
30.0 
19.5 
16.4 
20.8 
--- 
-- 
--- 
21.8 
--- 
- 
Ca4 
--- 
--- 
--- 
-- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
-- 
Ca5 
35.2 
18.4 
16.4 
21.3 
17.3 
-- 
- 
23.8 
--- 
--- 
Ca6 
--- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
-- 
- 
Ca7 
--- 
--- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Call 
--- 
--- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Ca12 
-- 
--- 
- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
- 
- 
--- 
-- 
Ca13 
- 
--- 
-- 
- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
- 
-- 
Ca14 
--- 
-- 
-- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
Ca15 
-- 
-- 
- - 
-- 
- - 
- 
-- 
-- 
'~bbreviations are as follows: C, cervical; T, thoracic; L, lumbar; Ca, caudal; LEN, length; CRW, cranial 
width; CRH, cranial height; CAW, caudal width; CAH, caudal height; NSH, neural spine height. 


296 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
TABLE 3- Measurements of cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and caudal vertebrae of early Eocene 
Pachyaena osszfraga, based on UM 95074. Measurements in mm. 
Centrum 
Neural Canal 
Pedicle length 
Spine 
Vertebra 
LEN' 
CRW 
CRH 
CAW 
CAH 
CRW 
CRH 
Left 
Right 
NSH 
Cal 
Ca2 
Ca3 
Ca4 
Ca5 
Ca6 
Ca7 
Ca8 
Ca9 
CalO 
Call 
Ca12 
Ca13 
Ca14 
Ca15 
'~bbreviations are as follows: C, cervical; T, thoracic; L, lumbar; Ca, caudal; LEN, length; CRW, cranial 
width; CRH, cranial height; CAW, caudal width; CAH, caudal height; NSH, neural spine height. 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
TABLE 4- Measurements of cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and caudal vertebrae of early Eocene 
Puchyuena o s s ~ ~ u g u ,  
based on YPM-PU 14708. Measurements in mm. 
Centrum 
Neural Canal 
Pedicle length 
Spine 
Vertebra 
LEN' 
CRW 
CRH 
CAW 
CAH 
CRW 
CRH 
Left 
Right 
NSH 
Cal 
Ca2 
Ca3 
Ca4 
Ca5 
Ca6 
Ca7 
Ca8 
Ca9 
CalO 
Call 
Ca12 
Ca13 
Ca14 
Ca15 
'~bbreviations are as follows: C, cervical; T, thoracic; L, lumbar; Ca, caudal; LEN, length; CRW, cranial 
width; CRH, cranial height; CAW, caudal width; CAH, caudal height; NSH, neural spine height. 


298 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
TABLE 5- Measurements of cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and caudal vertebrae of modem 
Crocuta crocura, based on YPM 4048. Measurements in mm. 
Centrum 
Vertebra 
LEN' 
CRW 
CRH 
CAW 
CAH 
c 1  ' 
24.5 
--- 
--- 
27.4 
20.5 
C2 
68.7 
--- 
-- 
23.6 
19.2 
C3 
39.2 
20.9 
16.9 
23.3 
21.9 
C4 
38.0 
20.2 
16.4 
23.6 
22.5 
C5 
37.2 
20.9 
16.7 
24.9 
23.5 
C6 
33.4 
20.4 
18.5 
25.4 
25.1 
C7 
32.7 
21.8 
20.4 
28.0 
23.0 
Neural Canal 
Pedicle length 
Spine 
CRW 
CRH 
Left 
Right 
NSH 
Ca 1 
19.0 
13.9 
10.2 
14.5 
9.3 
7.9 
3.6 
10.6 
11.2 
4.4 
Ca2 
18.1 
12.4 
9.8 
12.8 
9.2 
7.8 
3.3 
10.4 
9.7 
3.6 
Ca3 
17.1 
12.0 
9.9 
12.6 
9.7 
7.3 
2.0 
8.3 
8.2 
1.1 
Ca4 
17.3 
10.9 
9.6 
12.1 
8.8 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Ca5 
17.6 
10.2 
9.0 
11.1 
8.3 
-.- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Ca6 
17.9 
9.6 
8.2 
9.5 
7.9 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--. 
--- 
Ca7 
18.1 
8.8 
8.6 
8.6 
7.6 
--- 
.-- 
--- 
--. 
--- 
Ca8 
18.6 
8.0 
8.6 
7.5 
7.1 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Ca9 
18.6 
7.7 
7.2 
7.2 
6.1 
-.- 
-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
CalO 
18.4 
7.0 
6.6 
6.4 
5.4 
.-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Call 
17.6 
6.4 
6.1 
6.2 
5.0 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Ca12 
16.7 
5.4 
5.1 
4.9 
4.8 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
-- 
Ca13 
15.7 
5.0 
5.0 
4.8 
4.2 
--- 
--- 
--- 
-.- 
--- 
Ca14 
14.3 
4.0 
4.1 
3.8 
3.6 
.-- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
Ca15 
10.8 
3.8 
3.8 
3.0 
2.8 
--- 
--- 
--- 
--- 
-- 
'~bbreviations are as follows: C, cervical; T, thoracic; L, lumbar; Ca, caudal; LEN, length; CRW, cranial 
width; CRH, cranial height; CAW, caudal width; CAH, caudal height; NSH, neural spine height. 


PA CH YAENA OSSIFRA GA 
299 
FIG. 2-Cervical vertebrae of early Eocene Pachyaena ossifmga, UM 95074. A, Axis vertebra (C2) in 
left lateral view; B, same in ventral view. Note long centrurn, very large projecting neural spine, and 
strong ventral keel. C, Third cervical vertebra (C3) in left lateral view; D, same in ventral view. 
Note oblique angle the anterior and posterior articular surfaces make with the long axis of the centrum 
(seen in lateral view, anterior surface is higher than posterior surface), transverse groove in anterior 
articular surface (saddle-shaped profile in lateral view), and robust ventral keel that bifurcates 
posteriorly. Approximately 0.8 x natural size. 
For comparison, these measurements are 15.2 and 58.8 mm, respectively, in the hyaena 
Crocuta crocuta. 
C2 (Axis; UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-This vertebra is illustrated in Figure ~ A , B .  The 
centrum of the axis is dominated anteriorly by a robust conical odontoid process or dens, 
flanked by a pair of large, convex, bluntly triangular and outwardly-directed surfaces for 
articulation with the atlas. The caudal surface is shallowly concave and round in outline. The 
neural arch has postzygapophyses like those of following cervicals. The neural arch is drawn 


300 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
into a very long compressed neural spine that projects forward over the atlas, and backward 
to extend over C3 and C4. The ventral surface of the centrum bears a strong midline keel that 
ends in a very substantial hypapophysis. The ventral keel is flanked by lateral concavities or 
excavations for muscle attachment. The transverse processes do not project laterally but are 
swept backward as transverse spines. Each cames a canal for the vertebral artery, but these 
are not complete and cannot be measured. The functional length of the axis, measured from 
the front of the surfaces for articulation with the atlas to the back of the centrum, is about 
46.6 mm. The anterior width measured transversely across the surfaces for articulation with 
the atlas is 46.4 mm. 
For comparison, these measurements are 51.7 and 47.1 mm, 
respectively, in the hyaena Crocuta crocuta. 
C3 (UM 95074).-This vertebra is illustrated in Figure 2c,D. The centrum of this vertebra 
has obliquely-set articular surfaces, relative to the craniocaudal axis, like those of following 
cemicals. The cranial surface of the centrum is heart-shaped in anterior view, with a distinct 
groove crossing it transversely. This surface is convex and saddle-shaped. The caudal surface 
is more rounded in posterior view, and it is slightly concave. As in C2, the ventral surface of 
the centrum is strongly keeled and bears a complex hypapophysis posteriorly. The neural arch 
encloses a neural canal that appears to have been higher than it was wide, and the pedicles are 
robust. Pre- and postzygapophyses are strong and face dorsally and slightly medially, and 
ventrally and slightly laterally, respectively. The neural spine is thin and short. The transverse 
processes project downward and are divided into a thicker backward, and a more slender 
forward projecting portion. 
C4 (UM 95074).-This vertebra is very similar to C4 in the shape of the centrum and most 
other features, but it is slightly less well preserved. The neural arch is damaged and the neural 
spine is missing entirely. The transverse processes are directed a little more laterally, and the 
vertebrarterial canals are a little more compressed dorsoventrally. 
C5 (UM 95074).-This 
vertebra resembles C3 and C4 in shape and orientation of articular 
surfaces on the centrum, but the strong hypapophysis found on C3 and C4 is missing on C5. 
The neural arch is similar, but the neural canal is higher than it is wide. The prezygapophyses 
face a little more medially, and the postzygapophyses are closer together and face a little more 
laterally. The neural spine is broken but it is thinner and was evidently longer than that of C3 
while clearly shorter than that of C6. 
C6 (UM 94783, 95074).--The centrum here resembles that of C5 closely, but it differs in 
having a more circular, less heart-shaped, anterior articular surface. It also differs in having 
almost no ventral keel and no trace of a hypapophysis. This vertebra differs from C5 
principally in having a stronger and higher neural spine. It is also clear that there were strong 
ventrally-deflected inferior lamellae of the transverse processes on C6, although neither 
specimen preserves more than the base of this. 
C7 (UM 94783, 95074).-The 
centrum of C7 is broader and more flattened dorsoventrally 
than that of C3 through C6. Both anterior and posterior articular surfaces are elliptical, and 
obliquely oriented like those on preceding centra. The lateral margins of the posterior articular 
surface bear distinct depressions for articulation with the capitula of the first ribs. The neural 
arch has strong pre- and postzygapophyses like those of C6, but the neural spine is stronger 
and longer than those of preceding cervicals. The pedicles are more extended dorsoventrally 
than those of C6. The transverse processes are simple pillars directed transversely and only 
slightly ventrally. There is no vertebrarterial canal perforating the transverse processes. 
Summary.-The atlas is distinctive in lacking a centrum and in lacking a neural spine. The 
axis is distinctive in having a large conical dens or odontoid process and in having a very large 
neural spine. The remaining five cervical vertebrae, C3-C7, have rather wide flattened centra 
that are obliquely oriented at either end. They are slightly opisthocoelous; the anterior or 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
30 1 
cranial surface of the centrum is mildly convex, and the posterior or caudal surface is concave. 
The cranial and caudal surfaces of the centra of C3-C6 are more or less heart-shaped and 
rounded, respectively, but both surfaces of C7 are elliptical. The cranial surfaces of centra of 
C3-C7 have a weak transverse groove, making these surfaces saddle-shaped. The ventral 
surfaces of the centra are keeled. This ventral keel decreases, and the neural spine increases 
in height in successive vertebrae. 
Pedicles of the neural arches become shorter from C2 to C7. Prezygapophyses face upward 
and slightly inward in all, while postzygapophyses face downward and slightly outward. 
Transverse processes vary considerably; those of C3 are divided into a thicker backward, and 
a more slender forward-projecting portion, those of C4-C5 are directed mainly downward, and 
that of C6 has a relatively large downward-projecting inferior lamella. The transverse process 
of C7 is a simple pillar directed mainly transversely, with an expanded distal end. All cervical 
vertebrae except C7 have a vertebrarterial foramen perforating each transverse process. 
Metapophyses are absent on all cervical vertebrae. 
Thoracic Vertebrae 
There are twelve thoracic or rib-bearing vertebrae in Pachyaena osszfiaga, numbered T1 
through T12. Twelve is the minimum number of thoracics for which we have evidence, and 
successive vertebrae appear to articulate without requiring unknown intermediates. 
It is 
possible that there were one or two more thoracics somewhere in the series, but this is 
doubtful. Thoracic vertebrae of Pachyaena all have centra that are slightly more opistho- 
coelous than the cervical vertebrae, but without the markedly oblique articular surfaces 
characteristic of the cervicals. T3 through T6 have the shortest centra. Pre- and postzygapoph- 
yses are well developed. These change from relatively flat dorsoventrally-oriented articular 
surfaces to curved revolute articular surfaces at T10, which is the diaphragmatic vertebra. The 
neural spine on TI is the highest, and neural spines decrease progressively in height down the 
thoracic column. Neural spines on T1 through T9 project posteriorly, or caudally; TI0 is 
anticlinal; and neural spines on T11 and T12 project anteriorly, or cranially. Most of the 
centra are slightly keeled ventrally, but they usually lack hypapophyses. All of the thoracic 
centra bear foveae for rib capitula on their anterior surfaces and on their posterior surfaces 
(except T12), and transverse processes on TI through T9 bear additional foveae for rib 
tubercula. The transverse processes arise from the lateral surfaces of the pedicles (unlike those 
of lumbar vertebrae, which arise from the centrum). T11 and T12 are the only two thoracics 
with distinct accessory anapophyses. 
T1 (UM 94783, 95074).-The centrum of T1 is moderately opisthocoelous. The anterior 
surface is circular and kidney-shaped in outline, with a saddle-shaped articular surface, and 
with the capitular fovea for the first rib well separated, low on the anterior surface, and facing 
anteroventrally. The posterior surface is more elliptical and bordered by capitular foveae 
facing posterolaterally. 
The ventral surface of the centrum is more strongly keeled than 
following thoracics, with the keel separating concave depressions for muscle attachment. The 
pedicles of the neural arch are short and broad. Prezygapophyses protrude cranially, with 
slightly curved articular surfaces facing dorsomedially. 
Postzygapophyses are on the 
posteroventral surface of each lamina of the neural arch, and these have convexly rounded 
articular surfaces facing ventrally. 
The neural spine is very high, projecting dorsally and 
posteriorly. Both transverse processes are missing. 
T2 (UM 95074).-The 
centrum of T2 resembles that of T1, but it is slightly less 
opisthocoelous. The anterior capitular fovea for second rib is positioned higher on the centrum 
than is the case in T1. The ventral surface of the centrum is irregular, slightly concave, with 


302 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
shallower excavations separated by a wide ventral keel. The neural arch is deformed in 
UM 95074. The pedicles and laminae are similar to those of TI. The prezygapophyses are 
developed with large curved articular surfaces facing dorsomedially. The postzygapophyses 
are on the posteroventral part of the neural laminae, with flat or slightly concave oval articular 
surfaces facing ventrally and slightly caudally. The neural spine is intact, and it is very long 
and directed dorsally and caudally. Transverse processes are broken, but these were clearly 
massive. 
T3 (UM 94783, 95074).-T3 
has a centrum like that of T2, but the ventral keel is weak. 
The neural arch is preserved in both specimens, and prezygapophyses differ from those of T2 
in being flat or even slightly convex, facing dorsally, laterally, and slightly anteriorly. The 
postzygapophyses are missing in both specimens. Similarly, the neural spine is missing in both 
specimens. Left and right transverse processes are well preserved in 95074. These arise from 
the pedicles of the neural arch, they are robust, and the dorsal surfaces are wide and grooved 
anteriorly, and rough and narrower posteriorly. 
Ventrolateral surfaces of the transverse 
processes have conspicuousIy large concave foveae for articulation with rib tubercula. 
T4 (UM 94783,95074) .-This vertebra is illustrated in Figure 3. The centrum, neural arch, 
and pre- and postzygapophyses of T4 are much like those of T3. Ventrally, the centrum is 
slightly more keeled. 
Prezygapophyses taper anteriorly, with flat articular surfaces. 
Postzygapophyses are represented by oval articular surfaces on the ventral side of each lamina 
of the neural arch. The neural spine is long and slightly expanded at the dorsal end. It is 
directed posteriorly and dorsally. Transverse processes are robust but a little shorter, and their 
ventrolateral surfaces for articulation with rib tubercula are notably less concave than on T3. 
T5 (UM 94783, 95074).-T5 resembles T4, but the centrum is a little longer anteroposteri- 
orly, more hollowed laterally, and a little more keeled ventrally. The neural spine is directed 
more caudally than dorsally, at least at the base. Transverse processes are robust, but shorter 
than those of T4, and again have flat surfaces for articulation with rib tubercula. 
T6 (UM 94783, 95074) .-T6 resembles T5, but the neural spine is directed more caudally, 
it was probably shorter, and it differs in having more flared lamina of the neural spine, with 
postzygapophyses more widely separated. Transverse processes are slightly shorter than those 
of T5. The flat articular surface for the rib tuberculum is still well separated from the fovea 
for the capitulum. 
T7 (UM 94783, 95074).-The centrum of T7 differs from that of T6 in being broader and 
shallower dorsoventrally. Its ventral surface is smoothly convex, with little indication of a 
ventral keel. The pedicles of the neural arch are low but longer than those of TI-T6. The 
postzygapophyses are represented by oval articular surfaces on the ventral side of the laminae, 
and these are again well separated. The neural spine is directed caudally and dorsally, and it 
is conspicuously more gracile than that of T6. 
One transverse process is preserved in 
UM 94783, and it has about the same size and position as that of T6. 
T8 (UM 94783, 95074).-The 
centrum of T8 is preserved in UM 94783 and it is very 
similar to the centrum of T7. The only difference is a little less separation of the tubercular 
rib facet on the transverse process from the capitular fovea on the centrum. The neural spine 
is preserved in UM 95074, and it is virtually identical to that of T7. Both have the well 
separated postzygapophyses. 
T9 (UM 94783, 95074) .-Centra of posterior thoracic vertebrae are larger and heavier than 
those of preceding thoracics. The foveae for rib capitula on the posterior articular surface 
project from the centrum as distinct processes. The ventral surface of the centrum is smooth 
and convex, with a weak ventral keel. The pedicles are long and the laminae of the neural arch 
are broad and flat. Postzygapophyses are well separated and face ventrally. The neural spine 


PA CH YAENA OSSIFRA GA 
303 
FIG. 3-Fourth thoracic vertebra (T4) 
of early Eocene Pncllynenn os.~~ji-ugn, 
UM 95074, in anterior view 
(A) and left lateral view (B). Note very high neural spine and its posterodorsal orientation. 
Approximately 0.8 x natural size. 
slopes posteriorly like that of T7. Transverse processes have a relatively small surface for 
articulation with rib tubercula, and these are elongated posteriorly into a distinct accessory 
process that tapers caudally, forming a notch between each process itself and the posterior part 
of the lamina. 
TI0 (UM 95074).-TI0 
is the anticlinal and the diaphragmatic vertebra, showing some 
characteristics of lumbar vertebrae. It is anticlinal because the neural arch rises vertically 
above the postzygapoph yses . It is diaphragmatic because articular surfaces of the prezygapoph- 
yses controlling relative motion are flat like those of preceding thoracics, while the 
postzygapophyses are convex and cylindrical like those of succeeding thoracics and lumbars. 
The centrum of T10 is a little larger, but it is otherwise similar to that of T9. There are 
distinct anterior foveae, facing laterally and confluent with the anterior articular surface, for 
articulation with the capitula of left and right 10th ribs, and there are posterior foveae, each 
on its own process, on each side of the posterior articular surface of the centrum. These 
resemble processes mentioned in describing T9, but each is positioned a little lower on the 
centrum. The ventral surface of the centrum is distinctly keeled ventrally. The neural arch 
arises from the anterior part of the dorsal surface of the centrum, but overhangs the posterior 
part of the centrum. The pedicles are longer and stronger than those of TI-T9, and the middle 
part of each lamina is slightly concave. The prezygapophyses have flat, oval articular surfaces 
that taper cranially and face dorsally. The postzygapophyses are large and cylindrical, with 


304 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
distinctly revolute articular surfaces (like those illustrated by Osborn, 1900, for Patriofelis, and 
by Russell, 1964, for Arctocyon). The base of the neural spine projects backward, but the 
upper part stands vertically, making this, as noted above, the anticlinal vertebra. 
Both 
transverse processes are broken in the only specimen available. There is no evidence of a 
fovea on the transverse process for a rib tuberculum. T10 is the last thoracic vertebra bearing 
transverse processes of thoracic type. There appear to be distinct metapophyses extending 
dorsomedially . 
TI1 (UM 95074).-The centrum of TI1 resembles that of T10, but foveae for capitula of 
both ribs 11 and 12 are positioned much lower on the centrum. The pedicles of the neural arch 
are long and strong, and again the middle part of each lamina is concave. The prezygapoph- 
yses have groove-like articular surfaces facing upward and tapering cranially. 
The 
postzygapophyses are massive and distinctly revolute (these are more strongly developed than 
on T10). The neural spine is broken, but what remains shows it to have been directed 
anterodorsally. 
There are no real transverse processes. 
There is a strongly developed 
metapophysis above each prezygapophysis, and it appears that there was a stout anapophysis 
of indeterminate length paralleling each postzygapophysis above the caudal intervertebral notch. 
Each anapophysis is connected to each metapophysis by a weak ridge. 
TI2 (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-T12 is the last thoracic vertebra, and it is similar to 
succeeding lumbar vertebrae. The anterior articular surface of the centrum is kidney-shaped, 
with distinct foveae for rib capitula on the lateral margins. These foveae are positioned more 
ventrally than in preceding thoracics, and they are on ridgelike processes that extend caudally 
until they merge with ridges leading to each anapophysis (each process extending from a fovea 
is an incipient transverse process like those on the lumbars). The rib foveae of UM 95074 are 
small, while those on YPM-PU 14708 are larger and appear doubled (implying that the last rib 
had a subdivided head). There is a small nutrient foramen above the capitular fovea on the 
right side, but this appears to be missing on the left side. The caudal or posterior surface of 
the centrum is also kidney-shaped but it lacks any rib facets or foveae. The ventral surface of 
the centrum in UM 95074 is smooth and slightly excavated, with a weak ventral keel. In 
contrast, the ventral surface of the centrum in YPM-PU 14708 has large, paired, rugose, 
anterior and posterior hypapophyses. The pedicles of the neural arch are long anteroposteri- 
orly, and the middle of each lamina is concave. Prezygapophyses do not protrude very far 
anterior of the cranial surface of the centrum. These have deeply grooved revolute articular 
surfaces. Postzygapophyses are the largest of the thoracic vertebrae, and these too are sigmoid 
or revolute. The neural spine is directed dorsally and slightly cranially. There is a large and 
complex metapophysis rising above each prezygapophysis, and a well developed anapophysis 
projecting, caudally and a little laterally, over the caudal intervertebral notch. 
Summary.-All thoracic vertebrae are opisthocoelous to some degree. The ventral surfaces 
are concave, more or less ridged, and divided by a longitudinal ventral keel. The cranial 
surfaces of the centra of the thoracic vertebrae are heart-shaped in the anterior series and 
become kidney-shaped in the posterior series; all show some evidence of a transverse groove. 
Pedicles of the neural arches are shortest around T4 and increase in length down the column. 
TI-T9 are characterized by the great length of the backward sloping neural spine; the centrum 
is short, and has orthally rather than obliquely oriented anterior and posterior surfaces. All 
except TI2 bear a fovea at the anterior and posterior ends of the centrum for articulation with 
the capitulum of the corresponding rib. T12 has an anterior fovea only. The posterodorsal 
part of the neural arch of each anterior thoracic extends back over prezygapophyses of the 
succeeding vertebra and bears downwardly-directed postzygapophyses. Transverse processes 
are short and directed transversely and slightly dorsally; they are expanded distally with a 
ventrolateral surface for articulation with rib tubercula. 


PA CHXAENA OSSIFRA GA 
TI0 is distinctive in being both diaphragmatic and anticlinal, and T11-T12 are also distinctly 
different from other thoracics. The centra are longer, the neural spines are relatively short and 
directed anterodorsally, and foveae for rib capitula are better developed on the anterior ends 
of centra than on posterior ends. Prezygapophyses on TI1 and T12 are revolute and face 
inward toward the midline. Postzygapophyses on TlO, T11, and TI2 are revolute and face 
outward more than those on preceding thoracic vertebrae. Transverse processes are small on 
TI0 and absent on TI1 and T12. Metapophyses and anapophyses are present on posterior 
thoracics. 
Lumbar Vertebrae 
There are seven lumbar vertebrae in Pachyaena ossifraga, numbered L1 through L7. These 
are distinctive in having the largest centra, in lacking rib articulations, and in having well 
developed transverse processes. Transverse processes arise from the lateral surfaces of the 
centra and are progressively more dorsally placed from L1 to L7. Lumbar centra are long and 
heart- or kidney-shaped in cross-section. 
Anterior and posterior articular surfaces are less 
opisthocoelous than complex, with a narrow transverse saddle-shaped depression crossing the 
middle of the anterior surface, and a complementary transverse swell crossing the lower half 
of the posterior surface. These fit together on adjacent vertebrae (allowing for intervening 
elastic connective tissue). Ventral surfaces of the centra are usually conspicuously keeled. The 
only complete series is UM 95074, but YPM-PU 14708 is only missing L1 and it has 
transverse and other processes better preserved. 
UM 94783 is unusual in preserving two 
lumbar vertebrae with strongly convex postzygapophyses that are highly curved but not revolute 
(other lumbar postzygapophyses are missing in this specimen). 
YPM-PU 14708 is important because it includes lumbar vertebrae that were evidently found 
in direct association with the pelvis and sacrum. Five of these have "PS" numbers from 1 to 
5 inked on them, which we understand to mean "presacral" and to represent successive 
vertebral positions counting forward from the sacrum. The numbers were presumably inked 
on the vertebrae when these were separated during preparation, and the numbers provide 
evidence of position independent of vertebral morphology. 
L1 (UM 94783,95074).-The centrum of L1 is similar to that of T12 in size and shape, but 
the ventral surface is more strongly keeled. Pedicles and laminae of the neural arch are 
similar. Prezygapophyses are not well preserved, but, as in T12, they extend little past the 
anterior articular surface of the centrum. Postzygapophyses extend well behind the posterior 
surface of the centrum and they are strongly revolute. The neural spine is missing on both L1 
vertebrae at hand, but it appears from the base in UM 95074 that this is directed a little more 
dorsocranially than it is on T12. The neural spine is connected to the postzygapophyses 
posteriorly by strong ridges enclosing a deep fossa for muscle attachment. The base of one 
transverse process is preserved on the right side in UM 95074. It is small and thin, positioned 
just lateral to the anterior articular surface of the centrum, and curves anteriorly. There is a 
small but conspicuous nutrient foramen above the transverse process and this foramen is also 
present on the left side. Metapophyses were undoubtedly present but these are not preserved. 
Posterolaterally directed anapophyses were also present, but these are only represented by the 
base of one on the left side of UM 95074 and appear to have been small. 
L2 (UM 94783, 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-L2 
is reasonably well preserved in all three 
specimens, and between them all processes are well represented. The centrum is kidney-shaped 
in cross section and about as broad as it is long. It is distinctly keeled ventrally in all three 
specimens. Pedicles of the neural arch extend almost the entire length of the centrum. Pre- 
and postzygapophyses are like those of L1. The right postzygapophysis of UM 95074 is clearly 
revolute (the left one is not preserved, nor are postzygapophyses preserved on YPM- 


306 
X .  ZHOU ET AL. 
PU 14708), but, while large and strongly convex, neither postzygapophysis on L2 of 
UM 94783 is revolute. The neural spine is well preserved on UM 95074; it rises from the 
entire length of the neural arch and projects dorsally and just slightly cranially. The transverse 
process is intact on the left side of YPM-PU 14708; it is larger than that of L1, measuring 
about 25 mm in length, and it projects laterally, cranially, and slightly ventrally. 
The 
metapophysis in UM 94783 is broken and folded over the prezygapophysis, and little can be 
said about it except that it is large. The right anapophysis on UM 95074 is complete and it is 
little more than a muscle scar, while UM 94783 and YPM-PU 14708 clearly had distinct 
projecting anapophyses . 
L3 (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-UM 95074 preserves little more than a distorted 
centrum of L3, while YPM-PU 14708 is less distorted and nearly complete. The centrum is 
like that of L2 in being kidney-shaped in cross-section, and about as broad as it is long. Centra 
of both specimens are very strongly keeled ventrally. 
Prezygapophyses are broken, but 
postzygapophyses are well preserved on YPM-PU 14708; these are strongly revolute. The 
neural spine is well preserved on YPM-PU 14708; it rises from the most of the length of the 
neural arch and projects dorsally and cranially, with the dorsal edge expanded into a strong 
process. The transverse process is preserved on the right side of YPM-PU 14708; it appears 
to have been about the same size as that of L2, and it projects laterally from the anterior half 
of the centrum. Metapophyses are not preserved, but there is a distinct posteriorly-directed 
anapophysis preserved intact on the right side of YPM-PU 14708. 
L4 (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-This vertebra is illustrated in Figure 4. Both specimens 
are well preserved, and both have strong ventral keels on the centrum. The neural arch is like 
that of L3. Pre- and postzygapophyses are strong and distinctly revolute on both specimens. 
The neural spine rises from most of the length of the neural arch and it is long anteroposteri- 
orly and narrow transversely. 
The dorsal margin of the neural spine is not preserved. 
Transverse processes are intact on YPM-PU 14708; these are 40 mm long and they are directed 
laterally, anteriorly, and slightly ventrally. The caudal edge is a little thicker than the cranial 
edge. Metapophyses are well preserved on YPM-PU 14708 and these are very large and 
dorsolaterally projecting. Anapophyses, on the other hand, appear to be much smaller than 
those on preceding lumbars. 
L5 (UM 94783,95074; YPM-PU 14708).-L5 is like LA in having a keeled ventral margin 
of the centrum, a dorsocranially-directed neural spine, revolute zygapophyses (except in 
UM 94783), and strong metapophyses. Transverse processes are about 40 mm long, and they 
are directed laterally, anteriorly, and slightly ventrally. The transverse processes differ from 
those of LA in having distal ends more expanded anteriorly. Anapophyses are reduced to 
muscle scars. 
L6 (UM 94783,95074; YPM-PU 14708). -L6 resembles L5, though the ventral keel on the 
centrum is a little less developed, especially on UM 94783, the neural canal is smaller, and the 
neural arch is lower. Zygapophyses are revolute on UM 95074 and YPM-PU 14708. The 
neural spine is high and narrow, but without the expanded dorsal margin seen on L3. 
Transverse processes are about the same length as those of L5, but they are narrower 
anteroposteriorly and they form a curved foil sweeping laterally, anteriorly, and a little 
ventrally. Metapophyses are large, but anapophyses are lacking. The caudal intervertebral 
notch is more open than that on preceding lumbars. 
L7 (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-The centrum of L7 is about as broad as it is long, but 
it is different from those of other lumbars in being thinner dorsoventrally, with a cross-section 
that is more elliptical than kidney-shaped. 
The neural canal is small, the pedicles are 
significantly shorter anteroposteriorly than those of L6, and the neural arch is low. Pre- and 
postzygapophyses are revolute. The neural spine is directed dorsally and slightly anteriorly. 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
307 
FIG. 4-Fourth 
lumbar vertebra 6 4 )  of early Eocene Pachyaena ossifaga, UM 95074, in left lateral 
view (A) and posterior view (B). Neural spine is broken. Note robust revolute postzygapophyses with 
complex sigmoid articular surfaces, and small nonprojecting anapophysis visible in lateral view just 
anterior to and below the postzygapophysis. Approximately 0.8 x natural size. 
The dorsal margin of the neural spine is more expanded than that of L6. The posterior edge 
of the neural arch continues downward between the postzygapophyses without any development 
of the interzygapophyseal shelf found on preceding lumbars. The transverse process is intact 
on the left side in YPM-PU 14708. It is long but notably narrower than the transverse process 
of preceding lumbars, it is curved, and it extends more anteriorly than laterally. Metapophyses 
are present, but these are relatively simple. 
There are no anapophyses and the caudal 
intervertebral notch is open like that on L6. 
Summary.-Lumbar vertebrae are characterized by their large size, ribless condition, and 
great development of the transverse processes, metapophyses, and dorsocranially directed 
neural spines. All lumbar vertebrae are slightly opisthocoelous. Centra are elongated. The 
cranial surfaces of the centra of lumbar vertebrae are wide and kidney-shaped, with a transverse 
groove; caudal surfaces are more elliptical. The dorsal surfaces of the centra are excavated and 
bear two spindle-shaped fossae; ventral surfaces bear parallel concavities separated by a ventral 
longitudinal keel. The lengths of centra and pedicles increase from L1 to L6. Zygapophyses 
are revolute, and postzygapophyses become progressively stronger. 
Transverse processes are directed ventrolaterally as well as cranially; they are less developed 
on the anterior lumbar series and most developed on the posterior lumbar series. 
Well 
developed metapophyses appear to have been present on all lumbar vertebrae, and all except 
L6 and L7 have modest anapophyses. Anapophyses become progressively smaller in the 
lumbar series. 
Sacrum 
The sacrum of Pachyaena oss~fraga is preserved in UM 95074, where the anterior part 
remains attached to lumbar vertebra L7 (due to compression during fossilization). The sacrum 
is very well preserved in YPM-PU 14708, where it is still articulated with the pelvis. In both 


308 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
specimens, the sacrum is composed of three vertebrae fused into a single element (Sl-3), with 
divisions between constituent vertebrae marked by foramina for exit of the spinal nerves, 
remnants of metapophyses, and distinct neural spines. The centrum of S1 is much larger than 
that of S2, which is a little larger than the centrum of S3. Centra of the sacrum, like that of 
L7, are elliptical in cross-section. The neural canal extends through the sacrum, but it is small 
at the anterior end and smaller caudally, and the neural arch is low throughout. Prezygapoph- 
yses at the anterior end of the sacrum are curved to embrace the revolute postzygapophyses of 
L7, but postzygapophyses (sacral cornua or horns) are small spherical processes. Neural spines 
are intact on S2 and S3 of YPM-PU 14708, and these have dorsal margins that are much 
expanded for insertion of the supraspinous ligament. Transverse processes on S1 are short but 
large, articulating with ilia of the pelvis. Transverse processes on S2 and S3 join to form a 
thin marginal shelf on the sacrum for muscle attachment. Metapophyses are small but distinct 
on all three sacral vertebrae. 
Caudal Vertebrae 
The most complete series of caudal vertebrae for Pachyaena oss~fraga is preserved in YPM- 
PU 14708. These have the numbers 1-13 and 15 inked on them, which, again, was presumably 
done when they were prepared. UM 94783 includes two caudals, and UM 95074 includes 
eight caudals. All of the UM caudals appear to duplicate elements present in YPM-PU 14708. 
Thus there are a minimum of 15 vertebrae in the tail of Pachyaena, and, judging from size, 
the total number was probably about 20. 
Centra of anterior caudals tend to be elliptical and flattened dorsoventrally, while those of 
more posterior vertebrae are more nearly circular in cross-section. Anterior and posterior 
articular surfaces are usually convex with a central concavity. Anterior caudals have well 
developed neural canals, neural arches, zygapophyses, neural spines, and tr-nsverse processes, 
while these elements are much reduced or missing on posterior caudals. 
Cal (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-This vertebra is illustrated in Figure 5 ~ .  
Cal has the 
largest and most massive centrum of all the caudals. Anterior and posterior articular surfaces 
are elliptical. The ventral surface has a midline groove flanked by parallel ridges. The neural 
canal is small, and the neural arch is low. Pedicles extend most of the length of the centrum. 
Prezygapophyses are large and concave and face medially and a little dorsally, fitting around 
the sacral cornua. 
Postzygapophyses are slightly convex and face laterally and a little 
ventrally. The neural spine is strong, with its dorsal margin expanded for insertion of the 
supraspinous ligament. Transverse processes are expanded craniocaudally and transversely into 
a broad wing with distinct tubercles for muscle or ligament attachments at the anterolateral and 
posterolateral comers. The latter was probably an insertion for the sacrotuberous ligament and 
extensor caudae muscles. 
Metapophyses are present but weakly developed above the 
prezygapophyses. UM 95074 has distinct hemal processes on the posteroventral surface of the 
Cal centrum (YPM-PU 14708 does not), but no specimen has a hemal arch (chevron bone) 
preserved in association with Cal . 
Ca2 (YPM-PU 14708).-This vertebra is illustrated in Figure 5 ~ .  
Ca2 resembles Cal, but 
differs in having a shorter and smaller centrum than that of Cal. Prezygapophyses face more 
medially, and postzygapophyses face more ventrally than those on Cal. The neural canal is 
reduced. Transverse processes have a very large posterolateral processes for attachment of the 
sacrotuberous ligament and extensor caudae muscles. Metapophyses are more strongly 
developed on Ca2 than on Cal. An ossified hemal arch is present glued to the posteroventral 
surface of the centrum. This is robust and V-shaped, with the two legs of the V anterior, and 
the apex pointing posteriorly. 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
309 
FIG. 5-Proximal 
caudal vertebrae of early Eocene Pachyaena osslfraga, YPM-PU 14708. A, First 
caudal vertebra (Cal) in ventral view. B, Second caudal vertebra (Ca2) in ventral view. Anterior is 
to left. Note robust centra and large transverse processes. Ca2 has a hemal arch (chevron bone) 
attached posteroventrally. Approximately 0.8 x natural size. 
Ca3 (UM 94783, 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-This caudal vertebra is a little smaller than 
Ca2. The neural canal is'smaller, and the neural spine much reduced. Pre- and postzygapoph- 
yses are similar to those of Ca2. Transverse processes are similar in conformation, but 
smaller, and are again dominated by processes for attachment of a sacrotuberous ligament. 
Metapophyses are well developed. A V-shaped hemal arch similar to that associated with Ca2 
is preserved in matrix just ventraI to and posterior to the centrum. 
Ca4 (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-Ca4 resembles Ca3, but differs in being smaller, in 
having weaker postzygapophyses, in lacking a neural spine, and in having shorter transverse 
processes lateral to the posterior part of the centrum that are less swept backward than in Ca2 
or Ca3. The metapophyses are robust. There is a hemal arch associated with this vertebra, 
and this is V-shaped, but the arch is longer anteroposteriorly and the apex of the V now points 
more ventrally than posteriorly. 
Ca5 (UM 94783; YPM-PU 14708).-Ca5 has a slightly longer centrum than Ca4. The 
neural canal is small but still long. Prezygapophyseal articulations are much reduced, although 
the metapophyses rise like horns on this vertebra. Postzygapophyses are still present, but they 
are further reduced. The transverse processes do not project far from the centrum, but the are 
elongated anteroposteriorly into winglike sheets flanking the posterior half of the centrum. The 
hemal arch associated with Ca5 is disarticulated and attached to the front of Ca6. 
Ca6 (YPM-PU 14708).-Ca6 is distinctive in several ways. The centrum is about the same 
diameter as that of Ca5, but it is conspicuously longer. The neural canal is almost entirely 
gone, with only a few millimeters of bone covering what remains of a canal. Prezygapophyses 
still articulate with the postzygapophyses of Ca5, but there are only remnants of postzygapoph- 


yses on Ca6 that do not articulate with the following caudal vertebra. Transverse processes do 
not project far from the centrum, but they now extend the full length of the centrum. The 
transverse processes project anteriorly as thin horns of bone. Metapophyses project dorsally 
as robust horns as well. The hemal arch associated with Ca6 is preserved attached to the front 
of Ca7. This arch retains two small dorsal pedicles, but it is otherwise compressed to form a 
keeled midline plate of bone. 
Ca7 (YPM-PU 14708).-Ca7 
is longer and narrower than preceding caudal vertebrae. 
There is no neural arch. All that remain of prezygapophyses are the metapophyses, which are 
still prominent. There are small paired processes homologous to the postzygapophyses. The 
centrum flares anteriorly and posteriorly to form separate sets of transverse processes connected 
by a sharp ridge. 
Small hemal processes are present on the posteroventral surface of the 
centrum, and the hemal arch associated with this vertebra is preserved attached to the front of 
Ca8. 
Ca8 (YPM-PU 14708).-Ca8 is very similar to Ca7. It differs in being a little narrower and 
in having the remnants of postzygapophyses positioned at the posterior end of the centrum. 
The hemal arch associated with this vertebra is preserved attached to the posteroventral surface 
of Ca8. 
Ca9 (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-Ca9 has a cylindrical centrum enlarged slightly at both 
ends. It retains distinct dorsal metapophyses, a posterodorsal process homologous with the 
postzygapophyses, and distinct anterior transverse processes. The hemal arch associated with 
Ca9 is attached to the front of CalO. This hemal arch is smaller than the preceding one, and 
it is the last for which we have evidence. It retains two dorsal pedicles, and its ventral keel 
is elongated anteroposteriorly. 
CalO, Call, Ca12, Ca13 (UM 95074; YPM-PU 14708).-All 
four vertebrae are present 
in both specimens. Each successive vertebra resembles Ca9 in shape and differs only in being 
progressively smaller. 
Ca14.-Ca14 
is not represented in the material at hand, but it was undoubtedly intermediate 
in form and size between Ca13 and Ca15. 
Ca15 (YPM-PU 14708).--Thecentrum of Ca15 is a narrow cylinder, smaller than preceding 
vertebrae, with very small remnants of cranial dorsal processes (metapophyses), and very small 
remnants of anterior transverse processes. 
Summary-Anterior 
caudals have well-developed neural arches, transverse processes, and 
zygapophyses, but as the caudal vertebrae are followed back along the column all processes are 
gradually reduced. Metapophyses are strongly expressed anteriorly in the tail, and they are 
present in each of the elements preserved but diminish progressively in size toward the last 
caudal vertebra. The last caudal with a neural arch is Ca6, and here it is almost entirely lost. 
By Ca9 caudals are reduced to simple cylinders with small processes. Hemal arches (chevron 
bones) are preserved in association with Ca2 through Ca9, inclusive, indicating that the tail of 
Pachyaena osszfraga had a minimum of eight hemal arches. 
FUNCTION AND BEHAVIOR 
The functional organization of the vertebral column of modem mammals has received 
relatively little attention by comparison with study of the appendicular skeleton (Carlson, 1978). 
The vertebral column is also ignored in most efforts to reconstruct the locomotor and positional 
behavior of fossil mammals. Nevertheless, the axial skeleton is essential for support of the 
body and it plays an important role in locomotion: there are consistent correlations between 


PA CKYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
311 
modes of locomotion and patterns of variation in vertebral structure among extant mammals 
(Hatt, 1932; Slijper, 1946, 1947; Hildebrand, 1959; Howell, 1965; Gambaryan, 1974; Taylor 
1989). Mammalian vertebral function has traditionally been explained using mechanical 
principles associated with engineering constructs like bridges or bow-and-string models (e.g., 
Slijper, 1946; Young, 1957; Howell, 1965; Walker, 1987; Hildebrand, 1988). These analogies 
are complicated by the fact that vertebrae are not always static in alignment. Nonetheless, 
there is little question of the utility of engineering theory in functional studies of mammalian 
anatomy (Young, 1957; Alexander, 1989). In following sections, the form and function of the 
vertebral column of Pachyaena ossifraga are interpreted by analogy with engineering constructs 
and by comparison to living mammals of similar size. 
~e&th-of-vertebrae and width-of-vertebrae profiles for Pachyaena osslfraga are plotted in 
comparison to the spotted hyaena Crocuta crocuta in Figures 6 and 7. These show that 
lumbars and caudals of Pachyaena are the longest vertebrae, and that lumbars are the widest. 
The pattern of relative size in Pachyaena is similar to that in Crocuta except that thoracics, 
lumbars, and caudals of Pachyaena are longer, thoracics are wider, and caudals are much 
wider. 
Cervical Region 
In extant mammals, neck length is correlated with feeding and locomotor behaviors. The 
long neck of some ungulates facilitates efficient grazing of short grass without flexing or 
splaying the forelimbs (Howell, 1965). It has been speculated that a long neck in hyaenas 
makes it possible to dismember carcasses while they are held down with extended forelimbs 
(Cope, 1889). In Pachyaena ossi@aga, the cervical vertebrae are relatively long anteroposteri- 
orly, in comparison to those of some other mammals. P. ossifraga was not particularly long- 
legged, and thus its neck is also fairly long relative to forelimb length (Fig. 8), and its neck-to- 
forelimb length is comparable to that of ungulates and hyaenas. 
In analogy with a bridge model, the neck and large, heavy, head of P. ossifraga form a 
"girder," anteriorly cantilevered from a "pillar" formed by the forelimbs and scapular girdles. 
This "girder" is raised and supported primarily by m. splenius and the ligamentum nuchae, 
assisted principally by mm. multifidus, spinalis cervicis, longissimus capitis, and semispinalis 
capitis (Crouch, 1969; Evans and Christensen, 1979). The latter muscles act as "ties" anchored 
to "struts" made up of spinous and transverse processes (Young, 1957) holding the individual 
elements of the "girder" together. 
The neural spine of the axis vertebra (C2) of P. oss~fraga is large in resistance to the 
powerful pull of the epaxial muscles and ligamentum nuchae, and provides a spacious area for 
muscular and ligamentous insertion (Fig. 2 ~ ) .  The relatively short neural spines and transverse 
processes of vertebrae C3-C6 indicate that, as in extant ungulates, the main insertion of the 
ligamentum nuchae and m. splenius is on C2 (Dimery et al., 1985). This means that the elastic 
part of the supporting members reaching from the anterior thoracic region to the neck are 
correspondingly long, permitting a great degree of ventral flexion of the neck of cervical 
vertebrae C3-C6 (see Gambaryan, 1974: fig. 100; Wake, 1979: fig. 6.22; Hildebrand, 1988: 
fig. 22-9). In addition, although lacking the ball-and-socket articulation of centra common to 
ungulates, the obliquity and eccentric shape of the articular surfaces of the centra in P. 
oss~fraga (Fig. 2 ~ )  
must have allowed a fairly large range of motion in the neck region. 
The robustness of the cervical centra and large size of the articular surfaces (Fig. 2) indicate 
that powefil compressive stresses were distributed along the neck during dorsiflexion of the 
neck and ponderous head, and when the head was held erect. Strong midline keeling of centra 
of C2-C5 probably resisted bending stresses along the ventral margins of the centra when the 
head was lowered, and is evidence that P. ossrfraga possessed a stout ventral longitudinal 


X. ZHOU ET AL. 
5 
I 
Sacrum 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
_1 
I 
I 
I 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Vertebral number (position in column) 
FIG. 6-Length-of-vertebrae profile of early Eocene Pachyaena osstfraga compared to that of extant 
hyaena Crocuta crocuta. Solid circles in P. ossrfraga profile are based on UM 95074 (Table 3), and 
open circles are based on YPM-PU 14708 (Table 4) or are interpolated (T8, Ca14; tail was 
undoubtedly longer than shown here). C. crocuta profile is based on YPM 4048 (Table 5). Note that 
cervical and anterior thoracic vertebrae of Pachyaena are similar in length to those of Crocuta, but 
posterior thoracics and lumbars are longer. Middle caudals are much longer. 
ligament. This ligament would have helped move the cervical centra in concert while the head 
was being raised. 
In modern mammals, heavy heads and long necks create problems of inertia and oscillation 
during running (Howell, 1965); mammals so encumbered employ a stiff-backed "horse gallop" 
(Slijper, 1946; Hildebrand, 1959) and avoid gaits that require much vertical movement of the 
center of gravity. Hyaenas run with a peculiar, stiff-backed gallop (personal observation, WJS, 
Virunga National Park, Zaire, 1983-84), and most ungulates also maintain a rigid back when 
running (Slijper, 1946; Gambaryan, 1974). In contrast, mammals that incorporate dorsoventral 
flexion of the lower back into their strides during running tend to have relatively short necks 
and lightly-built heads (e.g., felids). Because of the size of the head and the length of the 
neck, it is a priori unlikely that Pachyaena ossifraga flexed and extended its vertebral column 
sagittally when running (confirmed by study of thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, see below). 
Thoracic Region 
The most notable feature of the anterior thoracic column of Pachyaena ossifraga is the 
tremendous height of the neural spines (Fig. 3). This feature is correlated with support and 
movement of a heavy head on a long neck (Walker, 1987), and is quite pronounced in extant 
grazing ungulates that habitually hold the head low (Howell, 1965). The neural spines of the 
anterior thoracic vertebrae provide the origin for the ligamentum nuchae and m. splenius, and 
act as lever arms to increase the moment, or torque, of muscular pull exerted on the neck and 
head. In P. ossifraga, the splenius muscle must have been thick and capable of generating 
great force. Muscles that anchor the shoulder girdle and counteract the upward thrust of the 
forelimb on the scapula (mm. trapezius and rhomboideus) also take their origin from the 


PA CHXAENA OSSIFRA GA 
313 
5 
Sacrum 
E 
Pach yaena ossifraga 
I 
1 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Vertebral number (position in column) 
FIG. 7-Width-of-vertebrae 
profile of early Eocene Pachyaena ossIfiaga compared to that of extant 
hyaena Crocuta crocura. Solid circles in P. ossCffaga profile are based on anterior or cranial widths 
of vertebrae in UM 95074 (Table 3)) and open circles are based on widths in YPM-PU 14708 
(Table 4) or are interpolated (C7, T8, Ca14; tail was undoubtedly longer than shown here). 
C. crocuta profile is based on widths in YPM 4048 (Table 5). Sacral widths are plotted at midpoint 
between preceding and following vertebrae. Note that most vertebrae of P. ossifraga are wider than 
those of C. crocuta. This difference is pronounced in the middle caudal series, indicating that 
Pachyaena had a much heavier tail. 
spinous processes of the anterior thoracic vertebrae (Walker, 1987). In mammals like P. 
osszfraga, with long necks and heavy heads, the center of gravity is located well forward in the 
trunk, and much support and propulsion is provided by the forelimb. In mammals of this type, 
it is natural that the muscles anchoring the shoulder girdle would be particularly strong and that 
the neural spines in this area would be correspondingly large. Hyaenas dismember and carry 
large pieces of carcasses for long distances, which Kruuk (1972) found to be an important 
function of their strong forequarters and powerful neck muscles. The vertebral morphology 
of P. osszj?aga suggests that it was capable of such behavior. 
The length and degree of angulation of neural spines TI-T9 indicate powerful support of 
most of the thoracic column from the anterior-limb "pillars" (Howell, 1965). By further 
analogy with a bridge model, the thoracic column from TI-T9 may be thought of as projecting 
bracket cantilevered posteriorly from the forelimbs (Fig. 8) and held up by strong supraspinous 
ligaments, as well as a complex mass of epaxial muscles. Vertebra T10, both diaphragmatic 
and anticlinal in P. oss~fraga, marks the functional transition between the thoracic and lumbar 
regions. The subdivision of the P. oss~fraga column into twelve thoracic and seven lumbar 
vertebrae is very common among extant mammals (Flower, 1885; Slijper, 1946). In P. 
ossifraga then, the postdiaphragmatic-presacral region contains nine vertebrae: two posterior 
thoracics and seven lumbars. These are considered together with the lumbars below. 
A diaphragmatic vertebra positioned several vertebrae anterior to the last thoracic, and an 
anticlinal vertebra with a low neural spine are features found in dorsomobile cursorial mammals 
(e.g., felids and canids) that coordinate dorsoventral flexion of the lower spine with hind limb 
movements to increase stride length (Hildebrand, 1959; Gambaryan, 1974; Taylor, 1989). In 
these mammals, the area of greatest sagittal flexion is around the anticlinal vertebra (Slijper, 


X. ZHOU ET AL. 
1946), and the neural spine of the anticlinal vertebra must be low to avoid impinging on neural 
spines of neighboring vertebrae during dorsiflexion of the lower back. Reversal in direction 
of slope of neural spines posterior to the anticlinal element suggests dynamic control of 
different sections of the thoracolumbar column from different centers of suspension (Howell, 
1965). This combination of features is found in Pachyaena oss~fraga but it is also found in 
some dorsostable mammals (Slijper, 1946: table 3), which achieve rigidity of the lower back 
through structural modification of postdiaphragmatic presacral vertebrae. 
Lumbar region 
As in the thorax, Pachyaena has lumbar characteristics of both dorsomobile and dorsostable 
mammals. 
Lumbar features of resemblance to dorsomobile mammals include transverse 
processes arising from the sides of the centra and angling cranially and ventrally; this gives a 
mechanical advantage to the sacrospinalis muscles by increasing their leverage and also by 
providing a wide lateral trough to accommodate thick muscle fascicles. Other features of P. 
oss~fraga that resemble those of dorsomobile mammals include the presence of relatively 
elongated lumbar centra and retention of seven lumbar vertebrae. 
A post-diaphragmatic, 
presacral region composed of nine vertebrae (seven lumbars and two lower thoracics), observed 
in P. oss~ji-aga, is typical of canids and felids (Flower, 1885; Slijper, 1946). 
There are a number of ways to maintain a rigid back during walking and running. Some 
mammals have a reduced number of lumbar vertebrae, and these are also often foreshortened. 
For example, hyaenas have five squat lumbar elements. Reducing the number of lumbar 
vertebrae reduces the capacity for sagittal excursion of the lower back. Alternatively, many 
bovids and cervids retain six or seven vertebral elements in the lumbar region and retain 
elongated centra, but possess other features that effectively immobilize these elements: 
(1) 
Horizontally or dorsally oriented lumbar transverse processes, which align the iliocostalis 
and longissimus muscles in a manner that promotes a rheostatic function and prevents 
much dorsiflexion of the lower back. 
(2) 
Craniocaudally expanded apices of the lumbar neural spines, for attachment of powerful, 
stiffening supraspinous ligaments, which limits the space available for dorsiflexion of 
adjacent vertebral elements. 
(3) 
Revolute or S-shaped postzygapophyses that interlock with embracing revolute 
prezygapophyses of adjacent vertebrae (Slijper, 1947; Howell, 1965; Gambaryan, 1974). 
P. oss~fi-aga exhibits craniocaudally expanded apices of its lumbar and posterior thoracic 
neural spines, and a tight embrasure of pre-and postzygapophyses, extending up to the level of 
the diaphragmatic vertebra. Several types of interlocking zygapophyses were recognized in 
"creodonts" by Denison (1938), ranging from ones that are simple curves to others that are 
highly revolute. Revolute zygapophyses are also known in ungulates, in Manis, and in certain 
pinnipeds (Cope, 1889; Osborn, 1900). Lumbar zygapophyses in most P. oss~fraga are highly 
revolute, and these mediate against sagittal or lateral rotation of adjacent vertebrae. Absence 
of long anapophyses that would enhance the leverage of m. longissimus is further evidence that 
Pachyaena had little potential for flexion of the lower back. Where preserved, mammillary 
processes (metapophyses) are large and stout, indicating the presence of strong multifidus 
muscles that stabilize the vertebral column in a "struts" and "ties" arrangement. The last two 
lumbar elements are encompassed laterally by the ilia, to which they were undoubtedly held 
firmly by iliolumbar ligaments, promoting rigidity of the lower back in P. osszfraga. 
The morphology and inferred function of the lower thoracic and lumbar region accords well 
with evidence from the anterior thoracic and cervical region. A mammal with a long neck and 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
FIG. 8-Provisional composite reconstruction of skeleton of Pachyaena ossffraga based primarily on 
UM 95074, with additions from AMNH 15730, AMNH 16154, UM 94783, YPM-PU 13064, and 
YPM-PU 14708. Note relatively large head, long neck relative to forelimb length, high neural spines 
of anterior thoracic vertebrae centered over the forelimb, straight posterior thoracic and lumbar 
vertebral column, and moderately heavy tail. PacJtyaena is interpreted as an efficient cursor, rather 
than a fast cursor, because it combined relatively short limbs with a thoracolumbar vertebral column 
of limited flexibility. 
heavy head will run more efficiently if the lower back is held rigid, limiting vertical 
displacement of the center of mass and consequently limiting oscillations of the head and neck. 
Sacrum 
The sacrum of Pachyaena ossrfiaga has three vertebral elements, which is the most common 
eutherian condition (Flower, 1885; Slijper, 1946; Howell, 1965). It is long and narrow, with 
large neural spines to anchor a strong supraspinous ligament and to provide attachments for 
powerful sacrospinalis muscles. The small size of the auricular surfaces articulating with the 
ilia, limited to the first sacral element, suggests that the bulk of the trunk weight was not 
supported by the posterior limb. The anterior articular facets of the sacrum tightly enfold 
postzygapophyses of the last lumbar vertebra, making it unlikely that movement was possible 
at the lumbosacral joint. In this regard, P. ossrpaga differs from dorsostable ungulates, which 
exhibit some capacity for limited sagittal movement of the spine at the lumbosacral joint 
(Slijper, 1946, 1947). Small neural canal diameters at each end of the sacrum indicate that 
neural control of caudal muscles was limited, and therefore that the tail was not prehensile. 
Caudal Region 
Despite the fact that the entire caudal series was not preserved, the size and stoutness of the 
anterior caudal vertebrae leave no doubt that Pachyaena osslj?aga possessed a long, heavy tail. 
The first few caudals have well-developed transverse and spinous processes for extensor caudae 
and flexor caudae muscles (Reighard and Jennings, 1935). Subsequent caudal elements are 


316 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
long and thick. Hemal arches or chevron bones extending well into the tail support the idea 
that strong flexor caudae muscles were present in P. oss~fraga. Long-bodied mammals like P. 
ossifaga often have long tails, and a long heavy tail may act as a posteriorly-projecting 
cantilever balancing a long lumbar column (Young, 1957; Hildebrand, 1988). 
DISCUSSION 
The vertebral column of Pachyaena ossijraga has a number of distinctive characteristics 
related to locomotor behavior. Pachyaena had a large heavy head, supported by powerful 
ligaments and neck muscles anchored in the anterior thoracic region. The neck was flexible 
and moderately long, comparable in length to the necks of modern grazing ungulates (when 
compared with forelimb length). Limbs of Pachyaena are short relative to body length. Much 
of the body mass of Pachyaena was probably supported by the forelimbs, and the forelimbs 
probably provided much of the propulsive force when running. 
Large jaws, powerful 
temporalis muscles, a strong neck, and strong forelimbs suggest that P. oss~fraga had the means 
to dismember carcasses, although it did not have the claws nor the sharp carnassial teeth of 
mammals that hunt and eat fresh meat. 
The length of the body, the regional numbers of thoracolumbar vertebrae, and the position 
of the diaphragmatic and anticlinal vertebra (one and the same in this case) are generalized 
characteristics of mammals. 
Superimposed on these generalized features are structural 
arrangements that hold the lower back rigid and prevent sagittal and lateral rotation of the 
vertebral column between the anticlinal vertebra and the sacrum. P. ossifraga was almost 
certainly as stiff-backed in running as modern dorsostable ungulates. Its long and moderately 
heavy tail is not unexpected in a mammal of its body length; the tail may have served to 
counterbalance the long lumbar column. 
It can be inferred from all of its vertebral characteristics taken together that Pachyaena 
ossifaga was a stiff-backed runner. The lower back does not contribute to stride length in 
dorsostable locomotion, and vertical movements of the center of mass are limited. This kind 
of locomotion is generally considered more eficient energetically than dorsomobile progression 
(Smith and Savage, 1955; Hildebrand, 1959), and it is employed by wide-ranging grazers and 
scavengers, and by some long-distance pursuit hunters. 
Stiff-backed spotted hyaenas, for 
example, do not stalk or ambush their prey, but run prey down at distances of up to 5 km. 
Hyaenas are also well known for their scavenging behavior (Kruuk, 1972). 
In contrast, ambush hunters require short bursts of speed to capture prey, and they sacrifice 
stamina for velocity. Cheetahs have been clocked at speeds of up to 112 km per hour (Dagg, 
1977). Dorsostable mammals with long legs can also run fast. Wildebeest and Thompson's 
gazelle have recorded speeds of up to 80 km per hour (Dagg, 1977). The spotted hyaena 
Crocuta, which is also fairly long-legged, can run faster than 50 km per hour (Kruuk, 1977; 
Dagg, 1977). However, because P. osszfraga is relatively short-limbed, it is unlikely to have 
been able to attain such speeds. It is more likely to have been an opportunistic hunter and 
scavenging carrion-feeder. 
In the introduction we reviewed three previous hypotheses about the feeding behavior of 
Pachyaena: (1) Szalay and Gould's idea that it was an advanced carnivore; (2) Boule, Osborn, 
and Scott's idea that it was a hyaena-like carrion-feeder, and (3) Cope and Matthew's idea that 
it fed on fish, turtles, mollusks, or other special prey requiring little masticatory force. All 
except Cope were aware that Pachyaena had the feet of a cursor. The idea that Pachyaena was 
an efficient runner, but not a fast runner, aids in evaluating these hypotheses concerning its 
feeding behavior. 
It seems unlikely that Pachyaena was an advanced carnivore, given its lack of carnassial 
teeth for eating fresh meat and its efficient but not particularly fast dilocomotory dorsostable 
pattern of locomotion. It is possible that Pachyaena fed on fish, turtles, mollusks, or other 


PA CHYAENA OSSIFRA GA 
317 
special prey, but these would not require running pursuit, and it would be surprising if such 
a specialized predator this large would be cursorial. 
Matthew (1915) proposed that 
mesonychids were cursorial to escape predators, but speed is not the only protection and large 
body size by itself would probably ensure safety. Thus we are left favoring the Boule, Osborn, 
and Scott hypothesis that Pachyaena was a hyaena-like camon-feeder. 
The main problem camon-feeders face is finding food: carcasses of dead animals do not 
have to be pursued and caught, and they do not require particularly strong jaws or sharp teeth 
if meat and connective tissue have had time to begin decomposition before they are 
(consumed-but carcasses of dead animals have to be found. Hyaenas that feed on carrion 
(particularly Hyaena; spotted hyaenas, genus Crocuta, spend more time hunting) are cursors 
with a keen sense of smell. Vultures that feed on carrion find food visually by circling high 
over open savanna. 
We envision Pachyaena osszfraga and other large mesonychids as cursorial, solitary, 
Hyaena-like, scavenging carrion-feeders that rarely if ever ate fresh meat. Their food was 
found on the Leichenfeld or "corpse-field" of von Koenigswald (1965). Existence of such a 
guild suggests that animal deaths occurred year-round, which is consistent with our 
understanding of limited Eocene seasonality. 
The idea that Pachyaena was solitary is an 
inference from their lack of dimorphism. Large mesonychids were probably more or less 
constantly on the move in search of food. Locomotor efficiency was more important than 
speed. This interpretation is consistent with the blunt-cusped dentition of Pachyaena, it is 
consistent with cursorial specializations of the feet of Pachyaena, and it is consistent with 
interpretations of vertebral structure discussed here. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The three best Pachyaena skeletons described here were found by a Boy Scout contingent 
from Powell, Wyoming, in 1947 (YPM-PU 14708); by one of us in 1988 (PDG, UM 94783); 
and by Dr. B. Holly Smith in 1989 (UM 95074). Dr. Malcolm C. McKenna of the American 
Museum of Natural History, Dr. Robert J. Emry of the U.S. National Museum of Natural 
History, and Dr. John H. Ostrom and Ms. Mary Ann Turner of the Peabody Museum of 
Natural History, Yale University, granted access to specimens of Pachyaena in their care. We 
thank Drs. Daniel C. Fisher and Gregg F. Gunnel1 for discussion. Ms. Bonnie Miljour drew 
the reconstructions in Figures 1 and 8. UM 95074 was prepared by WJS. Field research was 
supported by National Science Foundation grant BSR-8607481. 
LITERATURE CITED 
ALEXANDER, R. McN. 1989. Dynamics of Dinosaurs and other Extinct Giants. Columbia University 
Press, New York, 167 pp. 
BOULE, M. 1903. Le Pachyaena de Vaugirard. MC~noires de la SociCtC GCologique de France, Paris, 
PalContologie, 28: 1-16. 
CARLSON, H. 
1978. Morphology and contraction properties of cat lumbar back muscles. Acta 
Physiologica Scandinavica, 103: 180-197. 
COPE, E. D. 1874. Report upon vertebrate fossils discovered in New Mexico, with descriptions of new 
species. Annual Report of the Chief of Engineers, U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, 
Appendix FF: 1-18. 
. 1877. Report upon the extinct Vertebrata obtained in New Mexico by parties of the expedition 
of 1874. Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian, G. M. Wheeler, in charge, 
Washington, pp. 1-370. 
. 188 1. Notes on Creodonta. American Naturalist, 15: 101 8-1020. 


318 
X. ZHOU ET AL. 
. 1882. Contributions to the history of the Vertebrata of the lower Eocene of Wyoming and New 
Mexico, made during 1881. I. The fauna of the Wasatch beds of the basin of the Big Horn River. 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 20: 139-19 1. 
. 1884. The Creodonta. American Naturalist, 18: 255-267. 
. 1885. The Vertebrata of the Tertiary formations of the West. Book I. Report of the U.S. 
Geological Survey of the Territories, F. v.. Hayden, U.S. Geologist in Charge, washington, 3: 1- 
1009. . 1889. The mechanical causes of the development of the hard parts of the Mammalia. Journal 
of Morphology, 3: 205-289. 
CROUCH, J. E. 1969. Text-Atlas of Cat Anatomy. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, 399 pp. 
DAGG, A. I. 
1977. Running, Walking and Jumping. 
The Science of Locomotion. 
Wykeham 
Publications Ltd., London, 143 pp. 
DENISON, R. H. 
1938. The broad-skulled Pseudocreodi. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 37: 163-256. 
DIMERY, N. J., R. McN. ALEXANDER, and K. A. DEYST. 1985. Mechanics of the ligamentum 
nuchae of some artiodactyls. Journal of Zoology, London, 206: 341-351. 
EVANS, H. E., and G. C. CHRISTENSEN. 1979. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 2nd Edition. W. 
B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, 11 81 pp. 
FLOWER, W. H. 1885. An Introduction to the Osteology of the Mammalia. Macmillan and Co., 
London, 382 pp. 
GADOW, H. F. 
1933. The Evolution of the Vertebral Column. 
Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 356 pp. 
GAMBARYAN, P. P. 1974. How Mammals Run. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 367 pp. 
GINGERICH, P. D. 1990. Prediction of body mass in mammalian species from long bone lengths and 
diameters. Contributions from the Museum of Paleontology, University of Michigan, 28: 79-92. 
HATT, R. T. 1932. The vertebral column of ricochetal rodents. Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 63: 599-738. 
HCLDEBRAND, M. 1959. Motions of the running cheetah and horse. Journal of Mammalogy, 40: 
48 1-495. 
. 1988. Analysis of Vertebrate Structure, 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 701 pp. 
HOWELL, A. B. 1965. Speed in Animals. Hafner Publishing Company, New York, 270 pp. 
KOENIGSWALD, G. H. R. von. 1965. Das Leichenfeld als Biotop. Zoologische Jahrbiicher fir 
Systematik, 92: 73-82. 
KRUUK, H. 1972. The Spotted Hyaena. A Study of Predation and Social Behavior. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, 335 pp. 
MATTHEW, W. D. 
1909. The Carnivora and Insectivora of the Bridger Basin, middle Eocene. 
Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History, 9: 291-567. 
. 1915. A revision of the lower Eocene Wasatch and Wind River faunas. Part I.-Order 
Ferae 
(Carnivora). Suborder Creodonta. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, 34: 4-103. 
OSBORN, H. F. 1900. Oxyaena and Patriofelis restudied as terrestrial creodonts. Bulletin of the 
American Museum of Natural History, 13: 269-279. 
. 1910. The Age of Mammals in Europe, Asia, and North America. Macmillan Company, New 
York, 635 pp. 
and J. L. WORTMAN. 
1892. Fossil mammals of the Wahsatch and Wind River beds. 
Collection of 189 1. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, 4: 81-147. 
REIGHARD, J., and H. S. JENNINGS. 1935. Anatomy of the Cat. Henry Holt and Co., New York, 
486 pp. 
RUSSELL, D. E. 
1964. Les Mammiferes PalCocbnes d'Europe. 
MCmoires du Museum National 
d'Histoire Naturelle, SCrie C, Sciences de la Terre, 13: 1-324. 
SCOTT, W. B. 
1913. A History of the Land Mammals of the Western Hemisphere. Macmillan 
Company, New York, 693 pp. 
SLIJPER, E. J. 
1946. Comparative biologic-anatomical investigations on the vertebral column and 
spinal musculature of mammals. 
Verhandlingen der Koninklijke Nederlandsche Akademie van 
Wetenschappen, Tweede Sectie, 42: 1-128. 
. 1947. Observations on the vertebral column of the domestic animals. The Veterinary Journal, 
103: 376-387. 


PA CHYAENA OSSI FRA GA 
319 
SMITH, J. M., and R. J. G. SAVAGE. 1955. Some locomotory adaptations in mammals. Zoological 
Journal of the Limean Society, London, 42: 603-622. 
SZALAY, F. S., and S. J. GOULD. 1966. Asiatic Mesonychidae (Mammalia, Condylarthra). Bulletin 
of the American Museum of Natural History, 132: 127-174. 
TAYLOR, M. E. 1989. Locomotor adaptations by carnivores. In J. L. Gittleman (ed.), Carnivore 
Behavior, Ecology, and Evolution. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, p. 382-409. 
VAN VALEN, L. 1966. Deltatheridia, a new order of mammals. Bulletin of the American Museum 
of Natural History, 132: 1-126. 
. 1969. The multiple origins of the placental carnivores. Evolution, 23: 118-130. 
WALKER, W. F., Jr. 1987. Functional Anatomy of the Vertebrates. Saunders College Publishing, 
Philadelphia, 78 1 pp. 
WAKE, M. H. 1979. Hyman's Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy, 3rd Edition. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, 788 pp. 
YOUNG, J. Z. 1957. The Life of Mammals. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 820 pp. 
