--- 
source: 2006-8.pdf
--- 

 
 
 
Carnivore Talks 
 
presented at 
 
 
 
June 17-21, 2006 
 
University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, USA 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
2
 
(3) EVOLUTION AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE SPOTTED HYENA 
Kay E. Holekamp, Zoology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA, (KEH) 
 
I will explore possible roles of external selection pressure and developmental constraint in 
shaping the evolution of novel patterns of behavior in mammals. Spotted hyenas (Crocuta 
crocuta) are long-lived, gregarious carnivores exhibiting a peculiar suite of traits that are sex-
role reversed from mammalian norms; behaviorally, female Crocuta are more aggressive than, 
and socially dominant to, males. Here I will describe how my colleagues and students and I 
are testing two hypotheses suggesting explanations for the evolution of role-reversed behavior 
in female Crocuta. The first hypothesis suggests that female dominance and aggressiveness 
evolved to ensure adequate nutrition to lactating females and their dependent young during 
intense contest competition over food. The second hypothesis suggests that, rather than 
competition alone, a combination of two forces promoted the evolution of dominant, 
aggressive females in Crocuta; one involved external selection pressure imposed by intensive 
feeding competition as in the first hypothesis, and the other involved constraints imposed by 
slow or prolonged development of the complex feeding apparatus found in Crocuta and other 
bone-cracking hyenas. According to this second hypothesis, skull features that were superb 
adaptations in a solitary ancestor for scavenging effectively from large carcasses currently 
handicap young Crocuta during competitive feeding with conspecifics such that they need 
unusually high levels of maternal aid to feed on both soft and hard foods long after weaning. 
Thus aggressiveness and social dominance represent compensatory behavioral traits favored 
in mothers when development of the skull in offspring is refractory to selection pressure 
imposed by feeding competition. We are testing both these hypotheses with behavioral and 
morphological data. We anticipate that this research will ultimately teach us a great deal about 
the interaction of evolutionary forces promoting stasis with those promoting change. 
 
 
 
(10) HOME RANGES AND ACTIVITY PATTERNS OF ENDANGERED DARWIN’S 
FOXES AND THEIR SYMPATRIC CONGENERS IN THE NAHUELBUTA 
MOUNTAINS, SOUTH-CENTRAL CHILE. 
Elise McMahon, Veronica Farias & Todd K. Fuller, Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, 
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA, (EM), Natural 
Resources Conservation, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, 
USA, (VF,TKF) 
 
Three canid species occur in the Nahuelbuta Mountains of south central Chile. One of them, 
the Darwin’s fox, (or chilote; Pseudalopex fulvipes), is endemic to and endangered in Chile, 
and occurs in only one other location. The other two species, the grey fox (or chilla; P. 
griseus), and the culpeo fox (P. culpaeus) are found throughout Chile and neighboring 
countries. Because of the Darwin's fox's endangered status, we sought to identify differences 
in species behaviors that allow for coexistence. Thus, from September 1998 to May 2002 we 
gathered radio-telemetry data on the home ranges and activity patterns of 23 Darwin’s foxes, 
17 chilla foxes and 3 culpeo foxes within the 6,800-ha Parque Nacional Nahuelbuta (PNN). 
We plotted home ranges of both species on vegetation maps to estimate home range overlap 
within and among species, and to differentiate habitat selection among species. Seasonal 
activity patterns were estimated for comparison between species, sexes, and geographical 
area, as well. Preliminary analyses from 5079 independent activity readings for the Darwin’s 
fox indicate that this species is nocturnal with low levels of activity between 7:00 and 18:00. 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
3
Daytime activity for male and female Darwin’s fox increase during Fall/Winter. During 
Fall/Winter, foxes whose home ranges include areas outside the PNN have a higher daytime 
activity then those whose home ranges are restricted to PNN. Analyses of 3196 independent 
activity readings for chilla foxes indicate that this species is active throughout the day and 
night. Comparison of seasonal activity patterns indicates a drop in activity between 23:00 and 
10:00 during Fall/Winter. Radio-collared culpeo foxes left the study area shortly after being 
collared and were only relocated after death, which occurred far outside the park. We were 
unable to determine home ranges and activity patterns for this species, but our findings 
indicate that their use of the park is limited. 
 
 
 
(17) THE EVOLUTION OF POST-CRANIAL ECOMORPHS IN THE MUSTELIDAE 
Anthony R. Friscia, Sophie Gilbert, Klaus-Peter Koepfli & Blaire Van Valkenburgh, 
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California - Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, California, USA, (ARF,SG,KPK,BVV) 
 
A recent, comprehensive, molecular-based phylogeny of the Mustelidae allows for the 
mapping of ecological patterns within an evolutionary framework. The mustelids are a diverse 
group of mammalian carnivores, especially post-cranially, including semi-fossorial (badgers), 
arboreal (martens), terrestrial (wolverines) and aquatic taxa (otters), as well as elongate forms 
with bounding gaits (weasels). This study investigated possible morphological correlates of 
these locomotor styles by using a breadth of taxa across the mustelid family. The measures 
included simple vertebral counts as well as ratios of post-cranial measures that were thought 
to be functionally significant. Multivariate methods were used to explore these variables and 
find those that were best correlated with the primary locomotor mode of the taxa. These 
morphological indicators were then mapped to the phylogeny to determine the evolution of 
these traits, including polarity of transformations and the incidence of convergence across the 
family. Enhydra (the sea otter) is the most distinctive mustelid, with relatively long limbs, 
although it does group with other otters (Lutrinae). Both species of Martes used in this study 
(the fisher and the pine marten) do not group with other arboreal taxa, nor with their closest 
relatives, but with the similarly elongate Mustela (weasels). The evolution of locomotory 
styles is complex and driven both by phylogeny and ecology 
 
 
 
(23) RANK-RELATED PARTNER CHOICE IN THE FISSION-FUSION SOCIETY IN 
SOCIETY OF SPOTTED HYENAS 
Jennifer E. Smith, Sandra K. Memenis & Kay E. Holekamp, Zoology, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA, (JES,SKM,KEH) 
 
Biological market theory predicts that, when social partners vary in their relative value, 
choosy individuals should compete for partnerships with highly valued partners. In contrast to 
traditional optimality theory, it further predicts partner choice should be mutual because 
traders match assortatively within the biological marketplace. Here we tested these 
predictions in a wild population of spotted hyenas (Crocuta crocuta) in Kenya. Crocuta live in 
complex, fission-fusion societies structured by dominance hierarchies in which individuals 
vary greatly in their value as social companions. Because patterns of association among 
Crocuta reflect social preferences, we calculated Association Indices (AIs) to examine how 
social rank influences intrasexual partner choice among unrelated adult females. Highest-


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
4
ranking females were generally most gregarious. Females associated most often with 
dominant and adjacent-ranking females. Females joined subgroups based on the presence of 
particular conspecifics such that subordinates joined focal females at higher rates than did 
dominants. Dominants benefit from associations with subordinates by enjoying priority of 
access to resources obtained and defended by multiple group members, but the benefits to 
subordinates are unknown. To investigate this, we tested hypotheses suggesting how 
subordinate females might benefit from these associations by being harassed less away from 
food, better tolerated during feeding, and supported more often during coalitionary aggression 
by the higher-ranking females with whom they associate most often. We found support for the 
first two hypotheses, but not the third. Overall, our data resemble those documenting patterns 
of association among cercopithecine primates, and support the predictions of biological 
market theory. 
 
 
 
(24) SEX, AGE AND SCENT IN THE SPOTTED HYENA 
Kevin R. Theis, Anna L. Heckla & Kay E. Holekamp, Department of Zoology, Michigan 
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA, (KRT,ALH,KEH) 
 
An efficient communication system is a critical component of animal societies. In mammals, 
communication is often achieved via chemical signals that may convey information about the 
sender’s species, sex, age and individual identity, as well as social, reproductive and 
motivational condition. Previous research on the functions of mammalian scent-marking has 
often focused on marking by rodents, particularly adult males. Recent investigators have 
stressed that the functions of scent-marking vary not only between species, but also among 
age/sex classes within the same species. We investigated the functions of scent-marking 
(‘pasting’) in the spotted hyena, Crocuta crocuta. Specifically, we addressed the hypotheses 
that spotted hyena pasting functions in maintaining territories, advertising social status, male 
sexual advertisement, communicating female reproductive state, and facilitating recognition 
as a group member. We used naturalistic observational data to evaluate the social contexts in 
which pasting occurred, and conducted scent discrimination experiments with free-living 
hyenas in the Masai Mara National Reserve, Kenya. We confirm that pasting has a territorial 
function. Our results also suggest that pasting functions in communicating social status for 
adult males, although it does not appear to do so for adult females. We show that the 
frequency of adult male pasting behavior is not a predictor of reproductive success, and that 
adult females do not advertise sexual receptivity via pasting, although information about 
female reproductive state is clearly available in paste. Additionally, we found that, in contrast 
to captive female spotted hyenas, free-living adult females responded more strongly to scent 
from other adult females than from adult males. Lastly, we discuss preliminary evidence 
suggesting that frequent overmarking by spotted hyena cubs may facilitate their being 
recognized as group members before they are widely known as individuals.  
 
 
 
(27) AN EVALUATION OF THE CURRENT DISTRIBUTION AND CONSERVATION 
STATUS OF THE EASTERN SPOTTED SKUNK (SPILOGALE PUTORIUS) IN KANSAS 
Shannan K. Nilz & Elmer J. Finck, Department of Biological Sciences, Fort Hays State 
University, Hays, Kansas, USA, (SKN,EJF) 
 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
5
The eastern spotted skunk (Spilogale putorius) historically was reported as abundant or 
common throughout much of the central United States; however, three decades of population 
declines and limited records of recent occurrence present a need to confirm the current 
distribution and status of the species within the region. Our research focuses on the 
conservation issues that pertain to the biology, status, and distribution of the eastern spotted 
skunk in Kansas. At the onset of our research, our knowledge of the current distribution of the 
species was limited by a small number of recent voucher specimens and unsolicited sighting 
reports, which we used as a guideline for selecting our first field verification sites. In 2005, 
we confirmed the presence of the eastern spotted skunk in Cherokee County in southeastern 
Kansas, but failed to confirm the presence of the species at other locations within state. We 
selected the Cherokee County study site based on a voucher specimen from the past year; 
whereas, our other study sites were selected based on sighting reports from the past year. 
Because our efforts to confirm the presence of the eastern spotted skunk in all but one of our 
study areas were unsuccessful and study site selection was restricted to few widely separated 
locations, we solicited additional sighting information from several target groups. We will use 
the information from those reports for planning field verification sites and as a preliminary 
indication of the current distribution of the species within the state. Additional field studies 
are necessary to determine the distribution and population status of the eastern spotted skunk 
in Kansas. 
 
 
 
(41) PRESERVING A PIECE OF THE PRAIRIE: PARTNERSHIPS ARE KEY FOR SWIFT 
FOX RESTORATION IN SOUTH DAKOTA 
Francesca J. Ferrara, Kevin M. Honness, Shaun M. Grassel, Doug Albertson, Greg Schroeder 
& Trudy M. Ecoffey, Biological Research Division, Oglala Sioux Parks and Recreation 
Authority, Kyle, SD, USA, (FJF,TME), Swift Fox Restoration Project, Turner Endangered 
Species Fund, Fort Pierre, SD, USA, (KMH), Department of Wildlife, Fish and Recreation , 
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe, Lower Brule, SD, USA, (SMG), , Badlands National Park, Interior, 
SD, USA, (DA,GS) 
 
For several decades, the swift fox (Vulpes velox), has experienced population declines 
throughout most of its range. Once numerous across western South Dakota, they are now 
listed as state threatened. A coalition of projects including a private landowner, the National 
Park Service (NPS), and two Native American Tribes are working independently, yet 
cooperatively, to restore the swift fox. In 2002, the Turner Endangered Species Fund (TESF) 
released the first cohort of 30 translocated swift fox. In 2003, the Badlands National Park 
(BNP) followed suit. The Lower Brule Sioux Tribe (LBST) has plans to conduct their first 
release in the fall of 2006. The Oglala Sioux Tribe (OST) is in the process of completing 
surveys to determine population status and the feasibility of releases within their borders. As 
individuals, each project has the potential to make a localized difference but together, 
managing over 2.2 million acres, they form a stronger whole that completes a broader, 
regional vision. As with many restoration projects, progress is often slow, yet important 
scientific and social milestones have been reached. Scientific milestones include 
documentation of second-generation foxes born in SD and confirmed dispersal between TESF 
and BNP and remnant SD populations. Our research has provided insights into the success of 
fox translocation techniques, patterns of fox dispersal, habitat selection, and has initiated four 
related graduate student projects. Meanwhile, ongoing education outreach and one-on-one 
landowner contacts have served to foster broad community awareness and support for swift 
fox, widely considered one of the deciding factors for the success of restoration efforts. 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
6
Conserving native species and their attending landscapes increasingly need to be conducted 
over large scales involving many partners. These efforts provide a valuable model on how 
groups with diverse backgrounds, but shared values can make a conservation impact. 
 
 
 
(49) DIETARY RECONSTRUCTION OF CREODONTS AND NICHE OVERLAP WITH 
CARNIVORANS 
Amanda C. Hitchcock, Eric W. Dewar & Margery C. Coombs, Department of Biology, 
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA, (ACH,MCC), Graduate 
Program in Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 
Amherst, Massachusetts, USA, (EWD) 
 
Living carnivores fill a range of dietary niches. However, “carnivory” is a broad term that 
masks a great deal of complex dietary variation. Identifying this kind of variation is important 
to understanding the ecology and interactions of extinct species. In this study, low-
magnification dental stereomicroscopy was used to reconstruct the dietary ecology of 
creodonts, in order to learn about their biology and their place in fossil mammal communities. 
Creodonts are members of a taxon that is the extinct sister group to the Order Carnivora. To 
reconstruct diet, we compared the tooth wear of creodonts and fossil carnivorans to that of 
modern carnivorans. We made more than 100 molds of teeth with high-quality impression 
compound and used them to create epoxy resin casts which were examined under a 
stereomicroscope in order to observe the wear features. The averages of these counts directly 
reflect what an animal was chewing in its last days or weeks. Stereomicroscopy has proven to 
be a valuable tool to distinguish between different kinds of herbivory in extinct ungulates and 
primates, but had yet to be applied to creodonts. In this sample, we found a range of 
carnivorous niches in all species. Didymictis (Carnivora, Viverravidae) had heavy pitting and 
cross-scratching, which is associated with high amounts of grit or bone in the diet and with 
complex chewing; however, it also had puncture-pits, indicative of fruit in the diet. 
Hyaenodon (Creodonta, Hyaenodontidae) had intermediate levels of pitting and little to no 
cross-scratching, indicating mostly meat and bone with little variability in chewing stroke. 
Hesperocyon (Carnivora, Canidae) had the softest diet, with the lowest pitting and moderate 
cross-scratching. 
 
 
 
(54) ACTIVITY PATTERNS OF TWO SYMPATRIC SKUNK SPECIES (MEPHITIS 
MEPHITIS AND SPILOGALE GRACILIS) IN TEXAS 
Sean A. Neiswenter & Robert C. Dowler, Department of Biological Sciences, University of 
Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, (SAN), Department of Biology, Angelo State University, 
San Angelo, TX, (RCD) 
 
We used telemetry data to document and compare activity and movement patterns between 
Spilogale gracilis, the western spotted skunk, and Mephitis mephitis, the striped skunk, in 
west-central Texas. Mephitis mephitis had a higher rate of movement than S. gracilis. Both 
species had highest movement rates during fall, coinciding with dispersal of young. With the 
exception of summer, M. mephitis was significantly more active than S. gracilis and generally 
took shorter breaks during nightly activity. We documented statistical differences in activity 
patterns between the species for all seasons. The height in activity of one species occurred 
during the lowest activity of the other species, which may indicate avoidance of one species 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
7
by the other. Spilogale gracilis may forage for shorter times due to increased foraging 
efficiency and smaller body size. 
 
 
 
(59) A SHOT IN THE DARK: THE SEARCH FOR ACCURACY IN ESTIMATING SNOW 
LEOPARD ABUNDANCE 
Kyle P. McCarthy, Todd K. Fuller, Thomas M. McCarthy & Ma Ming, Department of Natural 
Resources Conservation, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, 
USA, (KPM,TKF), , International Snow Leopard Trust, Seattle, Washington, USA, (TMM), 
Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xinjiang, 
Urumqi, China, (MM) 
 
Snow leopards (Uncia uncia) are an important cultural symbol and ecological component of 
the Central Asian Mountains, but habitat loss, poaching, and retribution killing continue to 
threaten their survival. Snow leopards’ legendary camouflage and secretive nature historically 
have made their populations difficult to monitor, and conservation efforts are in need of 
dependable methods to estimate abundance. Here we assess the concordance of three methods 
for estimating snow leopard population size: camera capture-recapture estimates, standardized 
sign surveys, and predator-prey biomass ratios. Camera traps were used to capture 32, 12, and 
1 snow leopard images, respectively, in three areas of varying environmental conditions in the 
Tien Shan Mountains of Kyrgyzstan and China. We identified individual snow leopards in 
photos by their unique pelage patterns and estimated population abundance using a capture-
recapture statistical model. Densities in two study sites were 1.6 and 1.9 individuals/100 km2, 
and in the third study site one capture event limited our results to a minimum density of 0.2 
individuals/100 km2. Average amounts of snow leopard sign (scats and/or scrapes) varied 
substantially (16-95/km searched), as did concurrent ibex (Capra ibex) counts used to 
estimate available ibex biomass (766-9,196 kg/100 km2) and thus potential snow leopard 
abundance (0.1-0.9/100 km2) ; however, neither estimator correlated with photo-trap 
estimates or with each other. Variance due to low capture rates, biased sign observations, 
limited sample size, or unknown environmental circumstances may have led to these 
inconsistent and unexpected results. Regardless of the reason, our results give no indication 
that any one of these three methods is accurate under short timeframes and standard operating 
conditions. 
 
 
 
(70) REMOVAL OF MAMMALIAN PREDATORS REDUCES PREDATION RATE ON 
ARTIFICIAL BEACH-NESTS ON THE VIRGINIA BARRIER ISLANDS 
Raymond D. Dueser, Joel D. Martin, John H. Porter & Nancy D. Moncrief, Dept. of Wildland 
Resources, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322, (RDD, JDM), Dept. of Environmental 
Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22903, (JHP), Virginia Museum of 
Natural History, 1001 Douglas Ave. , Martinsville, VA 24112 , (NDM) 
 
Do islands on which mammalian predators have been reduced provide more secure beach-
nesting habitat than untreated islands? Does predation management reduce overall “predation 
intensity” on the eggs of beach-nesting birds? We ran a study to estimate “predation intensity” 
on eggs in artificial beach nests (scrapes) on two of the Virginia (U.S.A.) barrier islands. We 
compared predation intensity on scrapes on (1) predator-removal (Metompkin) and control 
(Parramore) islands in August 2003 and (2) on Parramore Island before (2003) and after 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
8
(June-July 2004) an intensive predator removal campaign. On each island, we established 100 
artificial scrapes at randomly-selected points along a 4-km transect oriented parallel to the 
beach face and located above the high tide line. Each scrape was stocked with a “clutch” of 2 
eggs, including 1 Japanese quail egg and 1 clay (Plasticene) egg. Each nest was monitored 
and restocked daily for 4 days. Metompkin was thought to be free of raccoons (Procyon lotor) 
and red foxes (Vulpes vulpes) in 2003, while Parramore harbored large numbers of both 
species. Mammalian predation rates on these unattended nests were vastly higher on 
Parramore (~99% per day) than on Metompkin (~0%). Nevertheless, gulls and ghost crabs 
depredated ~19% of the nests per day on Metompkin in the absence of mammalian predators. 
We repeated this trial in June and July 2004, using the same artificial nest stations. 
Metompkin harbored 1-2 raccoons at this time, while Parramore still harbored both species 
even after a large number of raccoons and red foxes had been removed in autumn 2003. 
Mammalian predation rates on Parramore (18% per day) were still higher than on Metompkin 
(~0% per day), but were down dramatically from 2003. Once again, gulls and ghost crabs 
depredated ~6% of the nest per day on Metompkin. These results suggest that predation 
management has significant potential for reducing nest predation on islands. 
 
 
 
(79) DO TWO SPECIES OF AMERICAN MARTENS EXIST? – A LOOK AT 
FECUNDITY 
Sara R. Anglin, Neil Anderson & Karen D. Stone, Department of Biology, Southern Oregon 
University, Ashland, Oregon, USA, (SRA,KDS), , Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks, 
Missoula, Montana, USA, (NA) 
 
Current research has raised questions concerning the taxonomy of the two subspecies groups 
(lineages) of American marten (Martes americana). These lineages, “americana” and 
“caurina”, were once recognized as distinct species, M. americana and M. caurina, but were 
lumped into one species in the 1950’s; however, these lineages have distinctive 
morphological and genetic differences. Through donations by trappers, we have collected 
samples from an area of sympatry in western Montana to further explore similarities and 
differences between these two lineages. Previous researchers studying in this same region 
identified a difference between fecundity rates of martens from northwestern and 
southwestern Montana and attributed this difference to ecological factors. However, previous 
genetic research has shown that the two lineages exist in Montana, “americana” in the 
northwestern region and a mix of “americana” and “caurina” in the southwestern section. 
Therefore, we are testing an alternative hypothesis that the difference in fecundity rates is due 
to genetic differences that exist between the lineages. DNA was extracted and a portion of the 
cytochrome b gene was amplified. A restriction enzyme digestion generated a diagnostic 
RFLP pattern for each individual, which was used to identify lineage type. Fecundity was 
indirectly measured using corpora lutea counts. Approximately 400 samples of both male and 
female have been collected over the past 6 years. Of these samples, 102 samples have been 
genotyped with 64 represent the “americana” lineage and 38 represent the “caurina” lineage. 
Mean corpora lutea counts were 2.85 (N=20) and 2.61 (N=18) for the “americana” and 
“caurina” lineages, respectively. This information adds to existing morphological and genetic 
data and should assist in the determination of the proper classification of these lineages. 
 
 
 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
9
(82) USE OF NON-INVASIVE SAMPLING TO STUDY RELATIVE PATTERNS OF 
DISTRIBUTION AND ABUNDANCE OF CANIDS AT MARINE CORPS BASE 
QUANTICO, VIRGINIA. 
Christine A. Bozarth, Larry L. Rockwood, Katherine Ralls & Jesus E. Maldonado, 
Department of Environmental Science and Public Policy, George Mason University, Fairfax, 
Virginia, USA, (CAB,LLR), Conservation and Research Center, Smithsonian National 
Zoological Park, Washington, D.C., USA, (KR), Genetics Program, Smithsonian Institution 
NMNH/NZP, Washington, D.C., USA, (JEM) 
 
Determining presence, distribution and abundance of wild canids is the first step in designing 
wildlife management plans for these species, particularly in areas where there is potential 
conflict with human use of the landscape. Non-invasive fecal DNA sampling has the potential 
to provide a wealth of information necessary for monitoring and managing canid species 
while eliminating the need to capture, handle or observe individuals. In this project we used 
non-invasively collected samples from scat to determine the presence and the relative 
distribution and abundance of wild canids that occur at Marine Corps Base Quantico located 
in Northern Virginia. We extracted DNA from 300 scat samples and amplified a short 
fragment of the mtDNA control region using primers specifically designed from North 
American canids. We demonstrate that these primers consistently amplified PCR products 
that varied in length for different canid species and confirm that this method is a reliable and 
quick way to differentiate between sympatric canids using non-invasive methods. Our 
analysis of 223 scat samples showed that gray foxes (Urocyon cinereoargenteus), red foxes 
(Vulpes vulpes) and coyotes (Canis latrans) occur sympatrically. Preliminary results suggest 
that gray foxes have a wider distribution and are more abundant than red foxes and coyotes in 
this area.  
 
 
 
(90) PHYLOGEOGRAPHY AND DEMOGRAPHIC HISTORY OF GRAY FOXES 
(UROCYON CINEREOARGENTEUS) FROM EASTERN NORTH AMERICA 
Stacey L. Lance, David J. Civitello, Julie L. Weston, Christine Bozarth & Jesus E. 
Maldonado, Department of Biology, Colby College, Waterville, Maine, USA, (SLL,DJC), 
Peromyscus Stock Center, Dept. of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, 
Columbia, South Carolina, USA, (JLW), Department of Environmental Science and Policy, 
George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, USA, (CB), Genetics Program, NZP/NMNH, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, District of Columiba, USA, (JEM) 
 
Gray foxes, Urocyon cinereoargenteus, are widely distributed in North America, Central 
America and northern South America. In spite of their extensive range there is suprisingly 
little known concerning their basic ecology, demography and phylogeography. In this study 
we used a phylogeographic approach to analyze gray fox populations along the east coast of 
North America. We examined mitochondrial DNA variation in 109 foxes from areas 
distributed throughout the Eastern USA including samples from South Carolina (n=48), 
Virginia (22), New England (n=19), and New York (n=22). These samples cover the range of 
two subspecies: U. c. borealis in the northeast, and U. c. cinereoargenteus occurring east of 
the Mississippi and north of Georgia. Analyses of the mtDNA control region revealed 13 
haplotypes, each closely linked in a star-shaped phylogenetic network; several of the most 
frequent haplotypes were internal, while the majority were unique to single populations and 
presented distal positions in the network. Overall there was a lack of genetic structure 
amongst populations with most of the variance explained by within population genetic 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
10
diversity. Results of a “mismatch distribution analysis” and the deviation from neutrality 
suggest that the northern populations have experienced a recent rapid demographic/ range 
expansion. Preliminary analyses of 6 microsatellite loci suggest similar patterns of genetic 
diversity. Our expansion hypothesis is supported by paleontological evidence that during the 
last glaciation gray foxes did not extend into the current range of U. c. borealis. Additionally, 
historical evidence suggests a second southward range shift in the 17th century when they 
disappeared from Canada at the same time red foxes were introduced. They have since 
recolonized and extended the previous northernmost limit of their range. We will discuss our 
results and compare them to studies of other furbearers in eastern North America.  
 
 
 
(91) DENSITY AND SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF BLACK BEARS IN 
SOUTHEASTERN OKLAHOMA USING HAIR-SNARE SAMPLES 
Angela G. Brown, Lynne C. Gardner-Santana, Eric C. Hellgren, Ronald A. Van Den Bussche 
& David M. Leslie, Jr., Oklahoma Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Oklahoma 
State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, (AGB,DML), Department of Zoology, 
Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, (LCG,RAV), Cooperative Wildlife 
Research Lab, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois, USA, (ECH) 
 
Historically, black bears (Ursus americanus) were present in Oklahoma but extripated in the 
early 1900s due to habitat loss and unregulated hunting. Reintroduction of black bears in the 
Ozark and Ouachita national forests of Arkansas between 1958–1968 by the Arkansas Game 
and Fish Commission successfully reestablished populations in these regions. Recent 
expansion of this black bear population into eastern Oklahoma has led to management 
questions regarding abundance and distribution. To learn more about the population in 
Oklahoma, 128 hair snares were set in 4.8 x 4.8-km grid cells over approximately 3,400 km2 
of the Ouachita Mountains. The hair snare enclosures consisted of barbed wire stretched 
around 3–6 trees at a height of 30.5–61.0 cm and baited with sardines and raspberry extract. 
Hair snares were checked for hair samples and rebaited approximately every 7 days. After 7 
weeks of sampling in June–August, 2004 and 2005, 650 hair samples were collected. Hair 
was collected from 57.8% (n=74) hair snare enclosures, averaging 2.87 hair samples/snare in 
2004 and 2.70 hair samples/snare in 2005. Genetic analysis of 299 samples identified 272 
(88.9%) unique individuals and 14 (4.6%) recaptures. Initial density estimates indicate a 
higher density of bears in eastern parts of the study area compared with western parts. 
 
 
 
(96) PHYLOGENY OF THE AELUROID CARNIVORA 
Jill A. Holliday, Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, (JAH) 
 
Evolutionary relationships within the aeluroid Carnivora ((Felidae, Hyaenidae, Viverridae, 
Herpestidae) have long been problematic. I present a combined evidence phylogeny of the 
aeluroid Carnivora, including both molecular and morphological information and both recent 
and fossil taxa. This combined evidence phylogeny, which includes over 40 recent taxa and 
over 40 fossil forms, adds significantly to our understanding of patterns of diversification 
between families and major clades, and adds support to recent hypotheses of relationships. 
 
 
 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
11
(104) GRIZZLY BEAR ABUNDANCE ESTIMATION WITH DNA MARK-RECAPTURE 
IN TAKU RIVER WATERSHED, BRITISH COLUMBIA 
Kim Heinemeyer & Paul C. Griffin, , Round River Conservation Studies, , (KH), Wildlife 
Biology Program, University of Montana, , (PCG) 
 
The Taku River is a large, unroaded watershed that supports grizzly bears and wild runs of the 
5 species of Pacific Salmon. During summer and fall, grizzly bears congregate along the Taku 
River and its tributaries to feed on salmon, but concern about the population is prompting 
efforts to estimate current abundance and begin long-term monitoring. Because bears 
congregate along the river during summer and fall runs of salmon, sampling DNA from bears 
along the linear river corridor should be an effective and efficient way to estimate abundance 
within portions of the watershed. Two mainstem river reaches (each ~55 km long) were 
separately, and repeatedly, sampled during salmon runs in 2000, 2001, and 2003. DNA from 
hair follicles was genotyped to individual with 6 polymorphic microsatellite loci; sex was 
determined from the amelogenin gene. In most years, a simple Huggins closed population 
model with no temporal variation or individual covariates was the most parsimonious for 
abundance estimation. We determined “bears per river km” by adding a buffer strip based on 
distances between relocations. The upper reach held ~1.2 grizzlies per km. The lower reach 
held ~0.3 grizzlies per km. This area was predicted to support high quality bear habitat and 
indigenous and local knowledge indicates that high numbers of bears have historically used 
the area, but that population has declined over the last several years. It is possible that high 
mortality due to increasing human access and/or the collapse of the fall chum populations 
have reduced grizzly populations. In each reach, the “bears per river km” was relatively 
consistent across all 3 years. We infer that the population was approximately closed during 
each summer of sampling based on the short recorded movement distances, and on low 
movement rate estimates from Pradel models. We conclude that mark-recapture sampling for 
grizzly DNA along rivers, during salmon runs, appears to be reliable for abundance 
estimation. 
 
 
 
(118) INFLUENCE OF INTERNAL PARASITES (BAYLISASCARIS COLUMNARIS) 
AND FOOD MANIPULATION ON INTERNAL BODY FAT STORES OF CAPTIVE 
STRIPED SKUNKS (MEPHITIS MEPHITIS). 
Travis W. Quirk, Serge Lariviere & Douglas P. Chivers, Department of Biology, University 
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, (TWQ), , Cree Hunters and Trappers Income 
Security Board, Saint Foy, Quebec, Canada, (SL), Department of Biology, Uni, Saskatoon, 
SK, Canada, (DPC) 
 
Striped skunks accumulate large amounts of body fat in order to survive the period of winter 
inactivity and food scarcity. Individuals that accumulate larger body fat reserves have 
increased survival over the winter season. Energy stores can potentially be influenced by 
energy intake and energy expenditures. Energy intake in the captive skunks is simplified by 
feeding the skunks a homogenous commercially prepared diet (that has a consistent energy 
value. Energy expenditures of the captive skunks are also similar with one possible difference 
being attributed to costs associated with parasitic infection. Baylisascaris columnaris is a 
common nematode found in the intestinal tract of skunks. Ivermectin, a drug belonging to the 
avermectin family that interferes with the nervous system of invertebrates, was tested for 
efficacy and subsequently used to determine impact of helminthes on storage of body fat in 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
12
captive striped skunks. A follow up experiment was performed to determine if there were 
interactions between food intake and anthelmintic treatment. 
 
 
 
(125) MECHANISTIC HOME RANGE MODELS CAPTURE SPATIAL PATTERNS AND 
DYNAMICS OF COYOTE TERRITORIES IN YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK 
Paul R. Moorcroft, Mark A. Lewis & Robert L. Crabtree, Organismic and Evolutionary 
Biology Dept., Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, (PRM), Dept. of Mathematics, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, (MAL), , Yellowstone Ecosystem Research Center, 
Bozeman, MT, (RLC) 
 
Patterns of space-use by individuals are fundamental to the ecology of animal populations 
influencing their social organization, mating systems, demography, and the spatial 
distribution of prey and competitors. To date, the principal method used to analyze the 
underlying determinants of animal home range patterns has been Resource Selection Analysis 
(RSA), a spatially implicit approach that examines the relative frequencies of animal 
relocations in relation to landscape attributes. In this analysis, we adopt an alternative 
approach, using a series of mechanistic home range models to analyze observed patterns of 
territorial space-use by coyote packs in the heterogeneous landscape of Yellowstone National 
Park. Unlike RSAs, mechanistic home range models are derived from underlying correlated 
random walk models of individual movement behavior, and yield spatially-explicit 
predictions for patterns of space-use by individuals. As we show here, mechanistic home 
range models can be used to determine the underlying determinants of animal home range 
patterns, incorporating both movement responses to underlying landscape heterogeneities and 
the effects of behavioral interactions between individuals. Our analysis indicates that the 
spatial arrangement of coyote territories in Yellowstone is determined by the spatial 
distribution of prey resources and an avoidance response to the presence of neighboring 
packs. We then show how the fitted mechanistic home range model can be used to correctly 
predict observed shifts in the patterns of coyote space-use in response to perturbation. 
 
 
 
(156) PHYLOGEOGRAPHY OF THE LONG-TAILED WEASEL, MUSTELA FRENATA 
Larisa E. Harding, Department of Biology, University of New Mexico , Albuquerque, New 
Mexico, USA, (LEH) 
 
The long-tailed weasel, Mustela frenata, ranges widely throughout North and Central America 
and extends primarily along the western slopes of the Andes to Bolivia in South America. 
Although it has the largest distribution of any mustelid in the western hemisphere, it has been 
poorly studied. This study represents the first attempt to genetically characterize Mustela 
frenata. Using primarily samples from frozen tissues, I sequenced the complete cytochrome-b 
gene for 25 of Hall's 42 designated subspecies. In an expanded data set representing 34 
subspecies, I used DNA extracted from skins of museum specimens to sequence a large 
portion of the control region (d-loop) for animals collected across the range. Analyses suggest 
structured clades in each of the Americas. This study also includes the first genetic sequences 
of a tropical weasel, Mustela africana, for outgroup comparison with M. frenata's sister taxon, 
Mustela vison. 
 
 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
13
 
(158) A GENETIC ANALYSIS OF BOBCATS  LYNX RUFUS IN THE MIDWEST 
Emily K. Croteau, Edward J. Heist & Clayton K. Nielsen, Department of Zoology, Southern 
Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois, USA, (EKC,EJH,CKN) 
 
The bobcat Lynx rufus is a highly adaptable and mobile species, as demonstrated by its 
expansive distribution ranging from southern Canada to northern Mexico. Prior to European 
settlement, the Midwest was comprised of a diverse array of land cover types including 
prairies, forests, and wetlands, much of which was suitable habitat for bobcats. However, 
during the last century, the Midwest underwent increased urbanization and conversion of 
suitable bobcat habitat to intensive agricultural land cover. It is unknown whether these 
landscape changes or other potential dispersal barriers (i.e., the Missouri and Ohio Rivers) 
have affected gene flow among Midwestern bobcat populations. Therefore, we examined the 
effects of habitat discontinuities and extent of genetic differentiation among bobcat 
populations throughout Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, and Missouri using ten microsatellite 
markers. Preliminary analysis from 190 bobcats using five microsatellite loci have revealed 
significant fine scale genetic structure between these areas (global FST = 0.0139, p value = 
0.004), thus habitat discontinuities or large rivers may be affecting gene flow in Midwestern 
bobcats. These results will allow wildlife biologists to better assess the management needs of 
bobcats and indicate how habitat may facilitate or impede gene flow among bobcat 
populations over large scales.  
 
 
 
(152) COMPETITION LIMITS THE SOUTHERN DISTRIBUTION OF BOBCATS 
Víctor Sánchez-Cordero, Sahotra Sarkar, David Stockwell & Howei Liu, Departamento de 
Zoología, Instituto de Biología, UNAM, Mexico City, (VSC), Section of Integrative Biology, 
University of Texas at Austin,, Austin, Texas, USA, (SS), San Diego Super Computer Center, 
University of California , 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA., (DS), San Diego 
Super Computer Center,, University of California , 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, 
USA., (HL) 
 
Bobcats Lynx rufus are opportunistic felids occurring in a diverse range of habitats and with a 
widespread distribution from southern Canada to southern Mexico. We modeled the 
ecological niches of the felid community in southern Mexico to explore why the bobcat 
distribution stops abruptly at the Isthmus of Tehuantepec (IT). The IT, a lowland region with 
subtropical swamp habitat, is unlikely to serve as a geographic and ecological barrier to 
bobcats. Mammal inventories conducted for over a century rejects the hypothesis that bobcats 
are present but have not yet been recorded south of the IT. No evidence of fossil records south 
of the IT provides little support for a past presence of bobcats in that region. We show that the 
ecological niche of bobcats extends south of the IT, suggesting that ecological conditions 
exist for the establishment of populations in that region. The overlap of the bobcat geographic 
niche was lowest with margay and ocelot, both felids with similar size and feeding habits. We 
propose that interspecific competition with other felids limits the southern distribution of 
bobcats, preventing dispersal to a suitable but geographically reduced niche south of the IT. 
 
 
 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
14
(171) EFFECTS OF URBANIZATION AND HABITAT FRAGMENTATION ON 
RODENT AND CARNIVORE COMMUNITIES IN COASTAL SAGE SCRUB 
COMMUNITIES 
Dana J. Morin & Jay E. Diffendorfer, Department of Biology, San Diego State University, 
San Diego, CA, (DJM), , Illinois Natural History Survey, Champaign, IL , (JED) 
 
Rapid, sprawling urbanization in southern California coastal sage scrub has created fragments 
of varying sizes within an urban matrix. As urban development and fragmentation continue, it 
is important for land managers to understand the impacts in order to devise and implement 
effective conservation plans. Fragmentation resulting in habitat loss and lack of connectivity 
is credited with altering basic ecological processes as well as population and community 
dynamics. This study focused on how fragmentation impacts carnivore activity and rodent 
communities. We sampled over four site types: edges and interiors of large reserves and small 
and large fragments within urban San Diego. We sampled carnivore activity with remote 
trigger cameras and rodent populations using mark-recapture. The results show a positive 
overall edge effect impacting coyote (Canis latrans) activity, an apex mammalian predator in 
this system. Other carnivore species, excluding bobcat (Felis rufus), were most commonly 
detected in fragments in relatively low numbers. In addition, rodent richness was higher at 
edges and lower at small fragments. Rodent abundance was higher at interiors compared to 
the other three site types and did not vary with carnivore activity. These results suggest 
habitat fragmentation has an important impact on both carnivores and rodents. Densities or 
activity levels of coyotes may be artificially high along edges due to allochthynous urban 
resource subsidies. High rates of coyote activity may negatively impact smaller carnivore 
species. Rodent species displayed differential responses to the site types indicating resource 
availability and competition play an important role in species composition. Habitat quality 
and human influences on edges may strongly affect essential resources and intraguild 
processes for both groups of mammals. Thus, factors other than overall area must also be 
considered in management decisions in San Diego’s fragmented landscape.  
 
 
 
(189) ASSESSING THE HEALTH OF FLORIDA PANTHERS FROM STABLE ISOTOPE 
GEOCHEMISTRY AND OTHER MEANS 
Laurie Wilkins, Julie Allen & Shelly Flanagin, Dept. of Natural History, Florida Museum of 
Natural History, Gainesville, Florida, USA, (LS), Det. of Zoology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida, USA, (JA), Dept. Natural History, Florida Museum of Natural History, 
Gainesville, Florida, USA, (SF) 
 
The Florida Panther (Puma concolor) is the only surviving population of puma in the Eastern 
U.S. Habitat loss and human persecution once reduced Florida Panther populations to as few 
as 30 individuals and its distribution to the southernmost (and not necessarily the most 
productive) regions of Florida. As a result, the Florida Panther has the lowest heterozygosity 
recorded among panther populations. Monitoring of the Florida Panther has revealed serious 
health problems associated with malnutrition and inbreeding, including congenital heart 
defects, cryptorchidism; poor semen quality, and elevated pathogen/parasite loads. Intense 
recovery efforts, such as genetic enrichment, through the introduction of Texas pumas, as well 
as land acquisition and new management practices, appear to be reversing these trends. The 
genetic restoration program has reduced the number of deleterious manifestations of 
inbreeding unique to Florida Panthers such as cowlicks, kinked tails, cryptorchidism, 
congenital heart defects, and population numbers have increased to an estimated 80 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
15
individuals. However, human population growth, restricted range size, and the landscape 
features of peninsular Florida continue to limit these efforts. This begs the question, "are the 
individuals in the population healthier than in the past?" We have examined two distinctly 
different types of data to assess Florida Panther health. Harris lines are transverse lines 
through long bones that are associated with arrested bone development, and have been used to 
document periods of dietary stress in other animals. Stable isotopes can be used to evaluate 
differences in diet, and can at times be used to indicate periods of dietary stress. Our data 
consistently show dramatic differences in male and female panther diet as well as small 
changes associated with habit and age. 
 
 
 
(206) JAGUAR (PANTHERA ONCA) CURRENT DISTRIBUTION IN TABASCO, 
WESTERN CAMPECHE AND NORTHERN CHIAPAS, MEXICO 
Mircea G. Hidalgo-Mihart & Daniela Valera-Aguilar, División Académica de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Universidad Juárez Autónoma de Tabasco, Villahermosa, Tabasco, México, 
(MGHM,DVA) 
 
During the Jaguar Conservation Symposium carried out by Wildlife Conservation Society in 
1999, extensive regions of southern Mexico, such as the state of Tabasco, northern Chiapas 
and western Campeche were identified as areas where the long term survival of jaguar 
populations is high. However, only 20% of the original terrestrial ecosystems in the western 
portion of this area is preserved. In this same region, other areas where human population is 
almost inexistent were recognized as areas where jaguar population status was unknown, such 
as the largest wetland system composed mostly by the Laguna de Terminos Wildlife 
Protection Area (LTWPA) and the Pantanos de Centla Biosphere Reserve (PCBR). To clarify 
the current jaguar distribution in the area, we looked for reports (skins, skulls, photographs or 
trustable references) of jaguar presence in the last 10 years. We found 55 jaguar records, most 
of them distributed around the LTWPA, the PCBR, and the Mexico-Guatemala border. To 
determine the possible habitat and human population characteristics that allow jaguars to 
persist in the area, we divided the study area in a 10x10km grid using a GIS, in which terrain, 
habitat and human population characteristics where obtained for each cell where recent jaguar 
records were found. Jaguar records were obtained in cells with a mean altitude of 42.5 m a s l 
(SD=70.8), a mean terrain complexity of 20.5m (SD=58.9), a mean percentage of preserved 
area of 70.2% (SD=26.5), a mean percentage of protected area of 37.7% (SD=43.8), a mean 
number of human inhabitants of 724 inhabitants per 100 square km (SD= 1000.4) and a mean 
road length of 13.5 km per 100 square km (SD 11.6). These results imply that recent jaguar 
records tend to be present in areas with low elevation, low human population and road density 
and highly preserved areas but not necessarily associated to protected areas.  
 
 
 
(209) RUN FASTER; JUMP HIGHER; ANATOMIC VARIATIONS IN THE PAWS OF 
CLOUDED LEOPARDS (NEOFELIS NEBULOSA) 
Virginia L. Naples & Christopher Hubbard, Osteoprep Lab, Division of Mammals, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C. , (VLN), Department of Biological Sciences, 
Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois, (CH) 
 
The clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa) is a medium-sized, highly arboreal cat. In this study 
the structure of the fore and hind limb paw pads was examined. The metacarpal and 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
16
metatarsal pads are covered by a cornified epidermis, beneath which is a supple subcutaneous 
fat pad that is extensively anchored to the tendon sheaths of the metacarpal and metarsal 
phalangeal joints, respectively. In the hind paw, three tendinous branches extend from the 
flexor digitorum superficialis muscle (flexor digitorum superficialis runs deep to the flexor 
retinaculum) that project through the fat pad and attach to the middle, medial and lateral sides 
of the paw pad epidermis. Previous reports have described tendinous extensions of the flexor 
digitorum superficialis muscle (previously known as the palmaris longus muscle) into the 
forepaw of the domestic cat, but not the hind paw. The combined effect of these tendinous 
extension insertions and the flexibility of the paw pad may allow contraction of the pad, thus 
enhancing the animal's ability to grip tree branches more effectively while hunting. 
 
 
 
(228) ONTOGENETIC CHANGE IN SKULL MORPHOLOGY AND FEEDING 
PERFORMANCE IN THE SPOTTED HYENA (CROCUTA CROCUTA) 
Jaime B. Tanner, Barbara L. Lundrigan & Kay E. Holekamp, Department of Zoology, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA, (JBT,BLL,KEH) 
 
Ontogeny in the spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta) is characterized by dramatic behavioral and 
morphological change. These large, gregarious carnivores feed in intensely competitive 
environments in which the ability to consume large quantities of food in a short period of time 
is highly advantageous. Furthermore, spotted hyenas have a highly durophageous diet in 
which they must crack open and consume bones of large diameter. Consequently, their skulls 
are highly specialized for durophagy, with enormous sagittal crests and wide zygomatic 
arches providing increased attachment area for muscles critical in bite force generation. In this 
study we used geometric morphometric techniques to quantify ontogenetic changes in skull 
size and shape in Crocuta crocuta. We analyzed the ventral and lateral views of 65 Crocuta 
skulls ranging in age from 1 day to 17 years. Although selection should favor rapid 
improvement in feeding performance in such competitive feeding environments, we found 
that Crocuta skulls continued to change in size and shape until 30 months of age. This delayed 
maturation is long after the average weaning age of 14 months and therefore presents 
limitations on aspects of feeding performance such as feeding speed and bite force generation. 
Feeding speed continues to increase significantly past 35 months of age, when post-cranial 
growth reaches its asymptote in both captive and wild hyenas. This delayed development in 
the feeding apparatus ultimately may provide insight into the adaptive significance of the 
unusual trait of female dominance in this species. 
 
 
 
(229) DEVELOPMENTS IN MAMMALIAN DIETARY RECONSTRUCTION OF 
CARNIVORES USING LOW-MAGNIFICATION STEREOMICROSCOPY OF DENTAL 
MICROWEAR 
Eric W. Dewar, Graduate Program in Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, University of 
Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA, (EWD) 
 
Living carnivorans have dietary preferences that range from strictly carnivorous to 
omnivorous and even herbivorous diets. Some of these diets are not predictable from dental 
form alone. I employed a stereoscopic dental microwear method to examine the use wear of 
living carnivorans with a range of observed diets. This microwear method has been shown to 
be a reliable indicator of diet in large, primarily herbivorous mammals, but is applied here to 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
17
living carnivores for the first time. I examined dental casts of 242 individuals from 23 species 
of living carnivorans with known diets in order to relate those diets to microwear patterns. I 
found that particular carnivoran diets shared common microwear fabrics, and that these 
fabrics were distinct from those that have been recognized for herbivorous mammals. In 
contrast to the microwear patterns of ungulates and primates, I found the primary 
discriminator of diet in carnivorans to be the number of small pits. Bivariate and multivariate 
statistical analyses of microwear on the first molar reliably separate the larger species (> 8 kg) 
into meat specialist, meat and bone, omnivore, and tough fibrous groupings. I concluded that 
the microwear fabrics of larger species had somewhat different functional implications than 
for medium-sized species (0.5-8 kg), because of the difficulty of distinguishing between 
pitting caused by chewing skeletal parts of prey and pitting caused by incidentally-ingested 
environmental grit. Microwear of the slicing carnassial teeth has a similar predominance of a 
pitting signal, but dietary interpretations are complicated by masticatory differences among 
species. Finally, an assessment of omnivory uses microwear features most associated with 
particular food types. The database developed here is being extended to facilitate dietary 
reconstructions of Paleogene mammals. 
 
 
 
(230) SEXUAL SHAPE DIMORPHISM AND RENSCH'S RULE IN UROCYON 
Heidi Schutz, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA, (HS) 
 
Bernhard Rensch (1960) demonstrated that an allometric relationship exists between sexual 
size dimorphism (SSD) and body size such that SSD increases with body size in taxa where 
males are larger than females and decreases with body size in taxa where females are larger. 
With some exceptions, various studies show support for this phenomenon now known as 
Rensch’s rule. However, Rensch’s rule has not been tested with regard to sexual shape 
dimorphism, nor has its effect been contrasted between different body regions. Two species 
within the genus Urocyon (Urocyon cinereoargenteus and Urocyon littoralis ) provide an 
excellent vehicle for such an examination given their close phylogenetic relationship and 
difference in body size due to dwarfism in U. littoralis. Landmark-based morphometric 
techniques were used to quantify cranial and pelvic shape differences between males and 
females of each species. 14 cranial and 14 pelvic landmarks, along with centroid size were 
examined in order to determine: 1) the presence of sexual shape dimorphism in the cranium 
and pelvis of each species, 2) the effect of body size as a covariate on sexual shape 
dimorphism, 3) variation in levels of shape dimorphism between the cranium and the pelvis, 
4) variation in levels of shape dimorphism between U. cinereoargenteus and U. littoralis, and 
5) to test the application of Rensch’s rule to shape dimorphism. 
 
 
 
(232) BRAIN SIZE EVOLUTION IN THE CANIFORMIA (CARNIVORA): 
INCORPORATING DATA FROM FOSSIL TAXA 
John A. Finarelli & John J. Flynn, Committee on Evolutinary Biology, University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA, (JAF), Division of Paleontology, American Museum of Natural 
History, New York, New York, USA, (JJF) 
 
Brain-body size allometries in the order Carnivora have been studied with respect to the 
pattern and timing of brain size evolution, as well as to correlated aspects of life history, 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
18
adaptation, and ecology. However, incorporating fossil data into investigations of brain size 
evolution has been hindered by a lack of data. Endocasts require special preservation of the 
interior of the braincase, while CT scanning can be time-consuming and expensive. A method 
for rapidly, inexpensively, and accurately estimating endocranial volumes from external skull 
measures, which has not yet been developed for Carnivora, has the potential to greatly 
increase the understanding of brain size evolution in fossil taxa. Endocranial volumes were 
estimated for 126 extant terrestrial carnivoran speciesfrom 825 museum specimens, spanning 
all major monophyletic carnivoran clades. Multiple linear regression combined with an AIC-
based model averaging was employed to predict endocranial volume from three external skull 
measures. The AIC-averaged model accurately predicts endocranial volumes for modern 
carnivoran taxa (R-squared = 0.983), and is robust to potential sampling problems with 
respect to taxa represented by only a few specimens. Moreover, the results do not reflect 
phylogenetic autocorrelation nor does it represent correlation induced by general body size 
scaling. Application of the model equation to fossil taxa, for which endocranial volumes have 
been directly measured from endocasts, demonstrates that the scaling relationship for modern 
taxa also pertains to extinct Carnivora. The robustness of this estimator across all Carnivora 
allows reconstructions of brain volumes for a diverse array of fossil taxa, and explicit testing 
of hypotheses of brain size evolution across the caniform clade. Preliminary data from an 
extensive sample of the Canidae reveals a pattern of phylogenetic control over 
encephalization that is decoupled from simultaneous trends in body size evolution. 
 
 
 
(240) SPATIAL ASSOCIATION OF RACCOONS AND OPOSSUMS IN ILLINOIS: NO 
EVIDENCE FOR COMPETITION 
Edward J. Heske & Tom A. Nelson, Center for Wildlife and Plant Ecology, Illinois Natural 
History Survey, Champaign, IL 61820, (EJH), Department of Biological Sciences, Eastern 
Illinois University, Charleston, IL 61920, (TAN) 
 
We examined data from 24 years (1981-2004) of annual spotlight surveys in Illinois to 
determine if sightings of raccoons (Procyon lotor) and opossums (Didelphis virginiana) 
showed patterns suggesting avoidance or competition. The 48 spotlight survey routes were 
stratified across Illinois, sampled following standard protocols each spring before leaf-out, 
and each 25 mi (40.3 km) long. Raccoons and opossums showed latitudinal gradients, with 
raccoons more abundant in the north and opossums more abundant in the south. Statewide, 
sightings of raccoons in surveys doubled since the 1980s, but sightings of opossums changed 
little. Considering 29 individual survey routes where raccoon sightings increased in number, 
opossum sightings decreased along only one, increased along five, and did not change along 
23. Considering 28,276 individual 1-mi segments along survey routes over the 24-yr period, a 
coefficient of association indicated a slightly positive, but near zero, association between 
raccoons and opossums. Coyotes (Canis latrans) and red foxes (Vulpes vulpes), which have 
been shown to interact negatively in several studies, showed inverse population trends since 
the mid 1980s and a negative association at the scale of 1-mi segments of survey routes in 
spite of much sparser data, but no clear trend at the scale of the entire survey route. Thus, we 
found no clear evidence for competition between raccoons and opossums although the 
patterns revealed for coyotes and red foxes show such evidence can be found when expected. 
 
 
 
(249) TESTING REMOTE CAMERAS FOR DETECTING CANADA LYNX IN MAINE 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
19
Clayton K. Nielsen & Mark McCollough, Cooperative Wildlife Research Lab, Southern 
Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale, Illinois, USA, (CKN), Maine Field Office, U.S. 
Fish and Wildlife Service, Old Town, Maine, USA, (MM) 
 
The Canada lynx Lynx canadensis is a federally-threatened species whose status is of 
considerable concern throughout their range in North America. Although snow-tracking and 
hair snares have been used to survey lynx populations, there is considerable interest in 
devising an alternative, effective technique for surveying lynx that does not face the 
challenges of previously-used methods. Our goal was to evaluate the use of remote cameras 
as a potential survey technique for lynx at the township scale. We placed 36 remote cameras 
(Moultrie Digital GameSpy; 1 camera/section) on an intensive lynx study area near Clayton 
Lake, Maine, and collected digital images during August-October 2005. Images were 
evaluated to determine lynx presence and make recommendations regarding the effectiveness 
of using this technique more widely. A total of 4,651 images were collected in 2,512 camera-
nights. Of these images, 1,686 contained animals (36%); we suggest many of the blank 
photographs occurred due to animals just outside of the camera sensor range. Forty-five lynx 
events were recorded, for a lynx encounter rate of 1%; 1.8 lynx were recorded per 100 
camera-nights. Lynx were detected in 17 of the 36 sections in the township (47%). We also 
modeled camera density and camera-days needed to detect lynx presence according to 
different combinations of cameras placed throughout the township. Finally, we provide 
recommendations for the proper use of remote cameras for surveying lynx in terms of proper 
camera placement, set-up, and equipment performance. 
 
 
 
(255) MORPHOLOGICAL EVIDENCE SUPPORTS THE STATUS OF THE EXTINCT 
SEA MINK (MAMMALIA:CARNIVORA:MUSTELIDAE) AS A SEPARATE SPECIES 
Rebecca A. Sealfon, Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA, (RAS) 
 
The sea mink (Neovison macrodon) was probably the most aquatic member of the 
Mustelinae, and the only musteline restricted to coastal habitats. Its status as a separate 
species has not been resolved. A larger relative of the American mink (N. vison), it inhabited 
the shores of New England and possibly southern Canada until the 19th century. Skeletal 
specimens were not collected by zoologists, but are known from Native American 
archaeological sites. The hypothesis that the sea mink showed dental divergence from N. 
vison, an indication of phylogenetic and ecological distinctness, was tested on 111 
archaeological mink specimens collected from Penobscot Bay, Maine and housed at the 
Maine State Museum. These were compared with 158 specimens measured for this study and 
78 others from the published literature, representing 4 subspecies of N. vison and 22 
additional musteloid genera. A total of 13 dental measurements were taken on all species, and 
studied using linear regression, principal components analysis and bivariate plots of residuals. 
In general, the distribution of these measurements was bimodal in the archaeological 
specimens, with most of the smaller individuals separable into two distinct categories. One 
category correlated very strongly (r≥0.98) with the mean values for N. vison. The other 
showed a somewhat weaker correlation with N. vison (r≤0.96), but a high correlation with the 
larger archaeological specimens. It appears likely that the archaeological specimens included 
primarily N. macrodon but also N. vison. The dental proportions of the several N. vison 
subspecies were nearly identical, while pairs of species within the Lutridae and genus Mustela 
showed divergence comparable to that of N. vison and N. macrodon. This suggests N. 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
20
macrodon was sufficiently distinct from N. vison to support its classification as a separate 
species.  
 
 
 
(259) RECOVERY OF FISHERS, MARTES PENNANTI, IN EASTERN CANADA 
Jeff Bowman, Wildlife Research & Development Section, Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada, (JB) 
 
I present an overview of research initiated to understand the recovery of fisher populations in 
Ontario, Canada. Fishers have recolonized much of this province following widespread 
extirpation during the 1930s. The research program had several components, including a 
genetic analysis of 800 fishers from across Ontario; a telemetry study of a putative source 
population in an untrapped refugium (Algonquin Park); a telemetry study of a population in a 
settled, agricultural landscape; and an analysis of 10 years of fisher abundance data obtained 
from 450,000 trap nights. The genetic analysis identified several subpopulations within the 
small geographic area studied; evidence that historical fragmentation of fishers through 
overharvest has structured the population. Trapping refugia (Algonquin and Adirondack 
parks, in particular) have played an important role in providing emigrants to recolonize 
habitats. Densities were much higher in the agricultural landscape than in Algonquin Park, 
suggesting that fishers benefitted from the large, diverse food supply of the settled area, and a 
net flow of migrant fishers from south to north implicated snow depth and food supply as 
limiting factors. 
 
 
 
(274) DEN SITE SELECTION BY FEMALE FLORIDA PANTHERS 
John F. Benson, Fish and Wildlife Research Institute, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation 
Commission, Naples, Florida, USA, (JFB) 
 
The Florida panther (Puma concolor coryi) is listed as an endangered subspecies under the 
United States endangered species act due to its restricted geographic range and low 
population numbers. Currently, panthers are restricted to 1 population in south Florida which 
likely consists of <100 individuals. Habitat loss and fragmentation appear to be among the 
main threats to persistence, but to date there has not been an adequate assessment of panther 
habitat preferences. Understanding which habitats are important to panther reproduction is 
especially critical for the conservation of this subspecies. During 1990-2006, >80 dens of 38 
female panthers across the occupied range of the subspecies have been visited to monitor 
reproduction and mark offspring. I will use a Euclidean distance based approach to assess den 
habitat selection, by comparing the distances between den locations and random sites to 
habitat types available to panthers within individual home ranges. Additionally, distances 
from den locations and random sites to landscape features (e.g., roads and habitat edges) will 
be compared to investigate potential selection or avoidance of these features. These results 
should identify habitats and landscape features associated with reproduction and kitten rearing 
and allow for improved habitat management and conservation efforts for this endangered 
species. 
 
 
 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
21
(276) LIVESTOCK GRAZING INFLUENCES DAILY PATTERNS OF ACTIVITY IN THE 
SPOTTED HYENA 
Joseph M. Kolowski, Dijana Katan, Kevin R. Theis & Kay E. Holekamp, Department of 
Zoology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA, (JMK,DK,KRT,KEH) 
 
Despite the relative rarity of large carnivores in human-altered habitat, behavioral plasticity 
with respect to use of both time and space has allowed some carnivores to coexist with 
humans in shared landscapes. Consequently, changes in carnivore activity patterns or 
movements can potentially be used as early behavioral indicators of the extent and severity of 
human disturbance. In the Maasai Mara National Reserve, Kenya, human disturbance in the 
form of livestock grazing and tour vehicle presence occurs at varying intensities throughout 
the Reserve. From 2002-2004 we monitored the density of both tour vehicles and livestock 
herds utilizing the territories of three separate social groups of spotted hyenas (Crocuta 
crocuta) to compare their relative exposure to human disturbance. Over the same period, we 
used long-term (2-15 hr) follows and behavioral observations of female adult hyenas from 
these groups to investigate the degree to which these disturbances influenced activity patterns, 
movement rates and timing of den use. Female hyenas in territories with daily livestock 
grazing and high tourist visitation rates showed reduced activity and den use relative to 
hyenas in an undisturbed territory during the times of day when human activity coincided 
with potential hyena activity. Specific times of day when activity was reduced indicated that 
livestock grazing, not tourist activity, was probably responsible for observed shifts in activity. 
We discuss possible indirect costs associated with observed alterations in timing of den use 
and activity in this species, as well as broader implications for carnivore conservation and 
management.  
 
 
 
(279) SOCIAL AND MATERNAL FACTORS INFLUENCE SURVIVAL IN THE 
SPOTTED HYENA (CROCUTA CROCUTA) 
Heather E. Watts & Kay E. Holekamp, Department of Zoology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA, (HEW,KEH) 
 
Understanding survivorship patterns is critical for elucidating selective pressures shaping life 
histories. Here, we examined two key aspects of survival: ontogenetic variation, and the 
influence of social and maternal factors, in the spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta). Spotted 
hyenas are large, gregarious carnivores that live in complex social groups structured by linear 
dominance hierarchies. In many mammals, mortality risks are unevenly distributed among 
life-history stages. We tested hypotheses suggesting that three life-history events (departure 
from the den, weaning, and first parturition) are particularly dangerous events in the lives of 
female hyenas. While mortality increased after departure from the den and weaning, there was 
no evidence of increased mortality associated with first parturition. We next examined 
whether sex, social rank, litter size, and maternal parity influence survivorship. Sex did not 
affect survivorship in the first two years of life, but social rank and maternal parity influenced 
lifelong survival in females. Though litter size influenced early survival, this effect vanished 
by 6 years of age. Finally, we examined whether social rank affects survival during dangerous 
ontogenetic transitions. High social rank increased the probability of surviving after weaning, 
but not after den independence. Our results indicate that social rank has an even greater 
impact on fitness in this species than previously recognized, and point to at least one 
mechanism by which rank influences survival. 
 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
22
 
 
(293) USING SITE OCCUPANCY MODELS TO DETERMINE THE EFFECTS OF 
HABITAT FRAGMENTATION AND LANDSCAPE CONTEXT ON MEDIUM-SIZED 
MAMMALIAN PREDATORS IN NORTHEASTERN NATIONAL PARKS 
Neil W. Talancy, Allan F. O'Connell Jr. & Thomas P. Husband, Natural Resources Science, 
University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rhode Island, USA, (NWT,TPH), , Patuxent Wildlife 
Research Center, Beltsville, Maryland, USA, (AFO) 
 
Human disturbance is a significant source of land use change around the world, particularly in 
the northeastern United States, where expanding human populations are causing increased 
landscape development, habitat fragmentation, and pressure on wildlife populations. The 
effects of fragmentation on a number of wildlife species have been well-documented, but for 
species like medium-sized mammalian predators that are often cryptic and elusive, these 
effects are difficult to evaluate and not well understood. To gain a better understanding of 
these relationships, we used remote cameras, track plates, and hair traps to collect 
presence/absence data on 10 mammalian predators within 8 National Park Service (NPS) sites 
across the northeast. We collected data on environmental variables at multiple spatial scales 
and modeled the responses of these species using site occupancy models that incorporate the 
probability of detection. Detection probabilities for the target species varied among time, 
space, and species, and all were <1 and most frequently <0.4. Using site occupancy models to 
account for this variation in detection, we determined that landscape scale variables were 
effective at describing differences in the occurrence of predators. Variables that focused on 
the amount of human disturbance, such as the amount of landscape development, 
fragmentation, and distance to the nearest occupied building, were the most important in 
describing the probability of site occupancy. Our research suggests that landscapes 
surrounding NPS sites should be considered as important sources of variation in species 
occurrence and patterns of distribution. Detection is an important parameter to incorporate 
when sampling wildlife populations because detectability varies over time and space and non-
detection of a species does not imply absence. 
 
 
 
(280) INDIVIDUAL PATTERNS OF LATRINE USE BY RACCOONS 
Suzanne Prange & Stanley D. Gehrt, , Max McGraw Wildlife Foundation and The Ohio State 
University, Dundee, Illinois, (SP), School of Natural Resourses, The Ohio State University 
and Max McGraw Wildlife Foundation, Columbus, Ohio, (SDG) 
 
Raccoons (Procyon lotor) defecate at preferred locations, or latrines, which typically occur on 
fallen logs or stumps. Although latrine use can be of both social and ecological importance 
due to disease and parasite transmission, little is known regarding raccoon behavior at 
latrines. In June 2004, we fitted 42 raccoons (20 males, 22 females) within a 20-ha portion of 
a natural area in northeastern Illinois with proximity detectors. We monitored raccoon 
behavior at 15 latrines and 21 control logs within our trapping area during a 2-wk period in 
October 2004 and 2005. Monitoring was accomplished by placing proximity detectors 
beneath logs such that detection of other collars occurred only if they were above or 
immediately next to the log. Ten males and 10 females visited latrine logs, whereas 6 males 
and 9 females visited controls. The number of visits/log was greater for latrine than control 
logs (P = 0.004), as was time spent at latrine logs (P = 0.045). Individual latrines were visited 
3 to 20 times (mean = 9.13, SD = 5.26) for a total duration of 17 to 556 sec (mean = 220.93, 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
23
SD = 178.82). Up to 6 individuals visited a latrine during a single night. One to 5 unique 
individuals visited a single latrine over the 2-wk period for both males (mean = 2.13, SD = 
1.38) and females (mean = 1.93, SD = 1.30). Individual males visited 1 to 8 different latrines 
(mean = 3.20, SD = 2.31), whereas individual females visited 1 to 6 latrines (mean = 2.90, SD 
= 1.64) during the 2-wk period. The number of visits to latrines by males and females did not 
differ (P = 0.935), although time spent at latrines was greater for males (P = 0.026). Typically 
only 1 or 2 new scats were deposited over the 2-wk period at each latrine (mean = 1.5, SD = 
0.707). Patterns of latrine visitation during this study suggested that latrines may serve social 
functions for the local raccoon population. 
 
 
 
(281) SOCIAL ORGANIZATION AND GROUP FORMATION OF RACCOONS AT THE 
NORTHERN EDGE OF THEIR DISTRIBUTION 
Justin A. Pitt, Serge Larivière & Francois Messier, Department of Biology, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, (JAP,FM), , Cree Hunters and Trappers Income 
Security Board, Sainte-Foy, Canada, (SL) 
 
We examined the spatial and temporal relationships of 104 radio-collared raccoons at the 
northern edge of their distribution to test hypotheses regarding social regulation and group 
formation of adult males. Female social tolerance varied among years, but adult females 
generally maintained relatively exclusive home ranges (percent overlap ranged from 2.2-
12.5%) that were dispersed in a uniform pattern throughout the duration of the study (R 
values ranging from 1.32-1.87). Even though female home ranges were dispersed regularly in 
the landscape, there were instances where females shared common resources and tolerated 
overlap. This behavior likely precludes the ability of raccoons to self regulate their densities 
by spacing behavior. Male social interactions were more complex than previously described 
for low density populations of raccoons, with most adult males (ca. 80%) forming coalition 
groups. We identified 15 coalitions that had extensively overlapping home ranges and 
positively associated nightly movements within group members (overlap indices ranging from 
85.3-97.3%); while maintaining relatively exclusive territories between groups (annual 
overlap indices ranging from 0-3.2%). Male coalition groups in carnivores are hypothesized 
to form in response to aggregations of females, but our data suggests this is not a prerequisite 
for the formation of male spatial groups. We propose a dominance hierarchy where 
subordinate males benefit through increased likelihood of territory inheritance while dominate 
males benefit through increase efficiency of territory defense. 
 
 
 
(283) SUB-STAND SELECTION OF CANADA LYNX (LYNX CANADENSIS) NATAL 
DENS IN NORTHWEST MAINE, USA 
John F. Organ, Jennifer H. Vashon, John E. McDonald, Adam D. Vashon, Shannon Crowley, 
George J. Matula, Jr., Walter J. Jakubas & Amy Meehan, Division of Wildlife and Sport Fish 
Restoration, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Hadley, Massachusetts, USA, (JFO,JEM), 
Wildlife Resource Assessment Section, Maine Dept. of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Bangor, 
Maine, USA, (JHV,SC,GJM,WJJ,AM), Wildlife Services, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 
Augusta, Maine, USA, (ADV) 
 
Canada lynx were listed as threatened in the contiguous United States under the Endangered 
Species Act in March 2000. Little information on lynx ecology at the southern extent of their 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
24
range was available at the time of listing, and no ecological studies had been conducted in 
eastern USA. A long term ecological study of lynx was initiated in 1999 in Maine in northeast 
USA. As part of this study, natal den habitat selection was investigated to address questions 
posed during the listing process as to importance of certain forest conditions to denning 
requirements. Lynx used both regenerating stands (n=16) and mature stands (n=9) for den 
sites. Sub stand characteristics of 26 den sites were compared to characteristics of stands 
containing the dens. We used logistic regression to identify sub stand components that 
distinguished natal dens from the residual stand and used the information-theoretic approach 
to select the models that best explained the data. Two models of the fifteen tested were good 
predictors of den sites. The top ranked model had three variables: tip-up mounds of blown 
down trees, visual obscurity as measured with a cover pole at 5 meters, and volume of above-
ground solid coarse woody debris (Wi = 0.39). The second ranked model had visual obscurity 
and tip-up mounds as the only two variables (Wi = 0.36). Lynx select for structure and cover 
within stands independent of stand age for natal den sites. 
 
 
 
(290) POPULATION STRUCTURE OF FISHERS (MARTES PENNANTI) ACROSS NEW 
YORK AND NEW ENGLAND 
Paul Rella-Hapeman, Emily K. Latch, Jenny A. Fike, Olin E. Rhodes, Jr. & C. William 
Kilpatrick, Department of Biology, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont, USA, 
(PSH), Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
IN, USA, (EKL,JAF,OER), Department of Biology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, 
USA, (CWK) 
 
Population structure was examined in fishers (Martes pennanti) across the northeastern United 
States using genotypic data (n=433) from 11 microsatellite loci. Both spatial and non-spatial 
methods of Bayesian clustering of genotypes resulted in the highest posterior probability of K 
at four populations across the study area. The uppermost level of structuring in the data set 
was determined to be K = 3 from the method of Evanno et al. (2005) and corresponded 
geographically to populations in New York, New Hampshire, and Maine & Vermont 
combined. Bayesian assignment of individuals to each of the three pre-defined populations 
(NY, NH, and ME & VT) ranged from 73.8-97.9% depending on the method used. 
Significant deviations from Hardy-Weinberg were detected at a few loci in all populations 
except Maine. Admixture analysis identified 34 samples with significant admixture, 18 of 
which were located in the vicinity of population boundaries or in areas of overlap between 
populations. Significant heterozygote deficiencies and positive FIS values in each population 
suggests further substructuring exists that was not detected using the Bayesian clustering 
methods. Both admixture and the Wahlund effect may be contributing to the deviation from 
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at loci in each population. Significant differentiation was 
detected between all pairs of populations using FST and allelic and genotypic differentiation. 
Current population structure of fishers in the northeastern United States appears to be derived 
from recolonization from the three refugial populations (ME, NY, and NH) described by 
Brander and Books (1973) and appears to have been influenced by the reintroductions of 
fishers that occurred between 1959 and 1991 at a few locations within the study area. 
 
 
 
(291) GENETIC STATUS AND ABUNDANCE OF A RECOLONIZING BLACK BEAR 
(URSUS AMERICANUS) POPULATION IN OKLAHOMA 


Carnivore Talks - ASM 06 
 
25
Lynne C. Gardner-Santana, Ronald A. Van Den Bussche, Eric C. Hellgren & David M. 
Leslie, Jr., Oklahoma Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Oklahoma State 
University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, (LCG-S,DML), Department of Zoology, Oklahoma 
State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA, (RAVDB), Cooperative Wildlife Research Lab, 
Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois, USA, (ECH) 
 
Extirpation of black bears (Ursus americanus) in Oklahoma and near extirpation in Arkansas 
occurred in the early 1900s. The translocation of 254 individuals from Minnesota and Canada 
during 1958-1968 led to the restoration of black bears to Arkansas by the mid-1990s. Black 
bears are dispersing west across mountain ridges of the Ouachita Mountains from Arkansas 
into areas in southeastern Oklahoma devoid of bears since 1915. The situation in which 
quality habitat is within dispersal range of a large demographically healthy bear population is 
rare due to increasing spatial limitations on available habitat. Genetic monitoring of this 
dispersal event provides a unique opportunity to examine characteristics of recolonizing 
populations. Natural recolonization is valuable as a potential tool for maintenance and 
enhancement of wildlife populations in the absence of adequate funding and public support, 
and populations involved can provide sources of novel genetic variation to species. We used 
noninvasive hair sampling to examine characteristics of the black bear population currently 
recolonizing its former range in Oklahoma. We collected hair samples from 128 hair snares 
set at a frequency of 1 trap per 23 km2 across the 3,420 km2 study area to ensure ≥1 trap per 
female homerange. Hair collection occurred during two 7-week periods from June–August 
2004 and 2005. We collected 650 hair samples, of which 640 (98.5%) were extracted; 299 
(46.7%) of these have been successfully sexed and genotyped at ≥7 of 10 microsatellite loci. 
Of these, 272 (91%) are unique individuals represented by a male-biased sex ratio of 1.4:1, 
and 14 (4.7%) are recaptures. The remaining 13 are duplicate samples. Genetic diversity in 
this population (0.77) is similar to its source population in Arkansas (~0.75) as well as other 
large black bear populations in North America (~0.79). No negative effects from inbreeding 
or reduced population size are evident. 
