--- 
source: 2007 000n-46.pdf
--- 

 
 
 
1
OTTER SURVEYS OF THE NORTH WEST SCOTTISH ISLANDS 
 
Paul YOXON  
 
International Otter Survival Fund, 7 Black Park, Broadford, Isle of Skye, IV49 9DE, Scotland, UK.  
 email: yoxon@otter.org 
 
Abstract.  Between 1995 and 2003 otter surveys were conducted on 11 islands off the north west coast of Scotland.  
These located holts in a 100 metre wide strip along the coasts of these islands.  The information was then used to 
calculate the total number of holts for each island and from that the adult otter population for each island was 
calculated using the models based on studies in Skye and Shetland.  The diet of marine-foraging otters was 
assessed from five of these islands using spraint analysis and compared with the diet of otters from other coastal 
areas in Scotland.  With the exception of the free-swimming saithe, the diet was dominated by small benthic fish, 
the five key prey species being viviparous blenny, five-bearded rockling, butterfish, sea scorpion and saithe.  
 
Keywords: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, Scottish islands, diet, spraint, geology. 
 
 
1  INTRODUCTION 
 
Since 1995 the International Otter Survival Fund has undertaken surveys of Eurasian otters 
(Lutra lutra) on a number of islands off the north west coast of Scotland.  Many, namely 
Eigg, Muck, Canna, Pabay, Coll and Tiree, had not been surveyed in the National Otter 
Surveys of Scotland undertaken in 1977-1979, 1984-1985 and 1991-1994 (GREEN AND 
GREEN, 1980, 1987, 1997).  This paper looks at the otter populations on Skye, Raasay, Pabay, 
Canna, Eigg, Castle, Muck, Coll, Tiree, South Uist and Barra (Figure 1) and examines the diet 
of the species on these islands.  
 
 
Figure 1:  Islands surveyed from 1995 to 2003 
S. Uist
Barra
Skye
Raasay
Pabay
Canna
Muck
Coll
Tiree


 
 
 
2
2  METHODOLOGY 
 
In Shetland, MOORHOUSE (1988) established a significant correlation between holt (den) and 
otter numbers, enabling the number of holts to be used as an index for the number of otters 
(KRUUK ET AL., 1989).  
Similar significant correlations were found in extensive and intensive studies carried 
out on Skye over a two year period, (YOXON, 1999).  The extensive study was undertaken on 
60% of the Skye coastline, while the intensive study covered four smaller areas covering a 
total of 30 kilometres. It may, therefore, be possible to use occupied holts to estimate otter 
populations along the coastlines of Skye and the other islands off the west coast of Scotland.  
For the surveys, each island was divided into 500 metre lengths measured at the high 
water mark. Such distances are easily manageable for fieldwork, while generally long enough 
to observe otter activity from a vantage point.  The following factors were examined:  
 
1. 
Otter observations 
2. 
Number of holts and lie-ups 
3. 
Number of freshwater pools    
 
2.1 Otter observations 
Observations, using 10 x 40 binoculars and a x30 telescope, were made from a vantage point 
in each 500 metre section before a survey of the coastline for sprainting sites and freshwater 
pools.  30 minutes was spent in each section. 
 
2.2 Holts and Lie-ups 
Holts:  Sites used by otters as holts are very variable and for the purpose of this study are defined 
as tunnel systems with signs of regular use by otters (KRUUK ET AL., 1989). The evidence of use 
consisted of tracks, flattened grass, fresh spraints and the characteristic odour in the holt. On 
Skye, holts were found predominately in rock piles within 50 metres of the shore. If two holts 
were more than ten metres apart they were considered separate. Holts are often very 
conspicuous, with well-marked sprainting points and prominent green grassy areas as a result of 
the nutrients in the spraint. 
 
Lie-ups: Otters use resting places throughout their range. These are mostly hollows under 
rocks or within reed/rush beds and usually have a path leading to them and a sprainting point 
nearby.  
 
2.3 Number of freshwater pools 
A freshwater pool was defined as an area of standing water with a minimum width or length 
of 0.5 metres and minimum depth of 0.1 metres. Personal observations indicated that otters do 
not use smaller pools. All such freshwater pools were counted and measured and it became 
evident that most, but not all, had sprainting points adjacent to them.  
 
 
3  RESULTS 
 
Table 1 details the survey information from the various islands visited.  The total time spent 
on the surveys was 532 hours.   
 
 
 


 
 
 
3
 
Table 1:  Islands surveyed for otters (1995-2003) 
 
Island 
Year surveyed 
Number of 500m 
sections surveyed 
Percentage of total 
coastline 
Skye 
1995 
622 
55% 
Raasay and other 
islands off Skye 
1995 
75 
19% 
Canna 
1996 
55 
79% 
South Uist 
1999 
152 
45% 
Pabay 
2000 
11 
100% 
Barra 
2000 
72 
51% 
Eigg 
2001 
39 
78% 
Castle, off Eigg 
2001 
6 
100% 
Muck 
2001 
22 
100% 
Coll 
2002 
73 
44% 
Tiree 
2003 
138 
100% 
 
 
3.1 Relationship between numbers of otters and holts 
In his study, MOORHOUSE (1988) used two methods to identify otters:  individuals could be 
recognised by characteristic patterns of white and yellow markings on the throat or lips; 
secondly, 13 individuals were tagged with coloured ear-tags. In each month the number of ear-
tagged and non ear-tagged otters was recorded and the number of otters present was calculated 
from the ratio of the number of tagged animals and non-tagged animals (Lincoln index), 
(SOUTHWOOD, 1966).  The number of occupied holts was then related to the number of resident 
females and the number of resident females to the numbers males and transient otters. 
 
On Skye, in four study areas it was possible over a 24 month period to identify 
individuals, and relate this to the number of holts in use at a particular time.  These could be 
recognised by characteristics such as pink patterns on the nose, "battle scars" (nicks out of ears, 
scars in fur, etc) and females with cubs could be identified.  
 
Counts were made of otter holts in use in a number of coastal areas on Skye (Figure 2).  
It was assumed that a holt was in current use if recent spraints were found within 10 metres of 
the entrance.  In addition to otter observations and other factors mentioned above, the geological 
nature of the area was identified. 
 
 
Four areas were intensively studied (Figure 2): 
 
1. 
Bogha an t-Sasunnaich to Ard Dorch:  18 kilometres of Torridonian and 
Mesozoic coastline.   
2. 
Camas Malag to Boreraig:  8.5 kilometres of mostly Mesozoic coastline.   
3. 
Drumfearn:  4 kilometres of Torridonian coastline.   
4. 
Loch na Dal:  3.5 kilometres of Torridonian coastline.  
 
 
Each coastal section was visited for a minimum of one hour every month throughout the 24 
month period.  From April to October the four areas were visited on a weekly basis for a 
minimum of two hours.  In view of the length of time spent in each section, we can be confident 
that all the resident otters were counted correctly.  
 


 
 
 
4
 
Figure 2:  Map showing the four areas used in the intensive study 
 
Certain assumptions are made in this estimate: 
 
a) All holts were counted 
b) All otters in each area were identified correctly 
c) The sections sampled were representative of the Skye coastline 
d) The ratio for the number of otters and number of holts was constant for all geological 
coastal zones 
e) The ratio of numbers of females, males, non-residents and cubs was constant 
 
These assumptions and their implications will be discussed in Section 6.  
 
3.3 Numbers of otters and holts 
Figure 3 shows the relationship between occupied holts per resident female in the 100 metre 
coastal strip in the four study areas of Torridonian and Mesozoic coastline compared with the 
number of resident adult females there.  
 
 


 
 
 
5
 
Figure 3:  The relationship between holts per resident female otter range in the 100 metre coastal strip in the four 
study areas of Torridonian and Mesozoic coastline compared with the number of resident adult females there. 
 
A total of 21 holts were found, with, on average 45% in use at any one time.  There is a 
strong positive correlation between the two parameters over the four study areas over the two 
year period (r = 0.93, df = 47, p < 0.001).  These study areas were also used by adult resident 
males, as well as other adult/juvenile otters.  Male ranges were larger than the resident females 
and an estimate was made of how many would be present in the study areas.  The mean number 
of otters and holts being used in each of the four study areas are shown in Table 2. 
 
Table 2:  Mean numbers of otters and holts in the study areas 
 
Area 
Coastal 
Length 
Resident 
Females 
Cubs 
Males 
Other 
Unknown * 
Holts in 
Use 
1 
18km 
4.8±0.13 
2.3±0.43 
1.8±0.12 
0.5±0.15 
8.5±0.31 
2 
4.3km 
2 
1 
0.7±0.21 
0.5±0.22 
4.5±0.22 
3 
4km 
1.1±0.14 
1.6±0.30 
0.7±0.18 
0.57±0.20 
2.4±0.20 
4 
3.5km 
1 
0.75±0.13 
0.25±0.12 
0.5±0.19 
1.7±0.25 
Total 
29.8km 
8.9±0.27 
5.7±0.86 
3.5±0.63 
2.1±0.76 
17.1±0.98 
 
*   Other unknown = mix of males and females whose sex could not be identified 
 
 
The mean estimate for the total number of adult otters in all four areas is 14.5 ±1.99 (one 
otter per 2.1 kilometres of coastline), 8.9 (61%) were resident females (0.52 females per holt), 
3.5 (24%) resident males, and 2.1 transients. 
 
3.4 Estimating otter numbers 
Where possible, areas of a particular geological composition were compared with similar 
areas on Skye. 
The relationship on Shetland was found to be 0.33 females per holt and the  
 
Total number of otters = 1.83 x number of resident females 


 
 
 
6
The relationship on Skye on four study areas over two years was found to be 0.52 
females per holt and the  
 
Total number of otters = 1.64 x resident females 
 
Using these relationships an estimate can therefore be made for the otter populations 
on the islands surveyed (Table 3).   
 
Table 3:  Estimates of numbers of holts and adult otter numbers on the north west Scottish islands. 
 
No 
Island 
Number of 
holts counted 
Estimate of total 
holts for each 
island 
Estimated otter 
population based 
on Yoxon (1999) 
Estimated otter 
population based 
on Kruuk (1995) 
1 
Skye 
117 
192.2 
164 
116 
2 
Raasay and 
other islands 
off Skye 
11 
102.9 
88 
62 
3 
Canna 
3 
3.8 
3 
2 
4 
South Uist 
34 
122 
104 
74 
5 
Pabay 
5 
5 * 
4 
3 
6 
Barra 
10 
27.2 
23 
16 
7 
Eigg 
17 
22 
19 
13 
8 
Castle 
2 
2 * 
2 
1 
9 
Muck 
5 
5 * 
4 
3 
10 
Coll 
30 
62.4 
53 
38 
11 
Tiree 
9 
9* 
8 
6 
 
* These are actual holt numbers 
Notes on islands: 
 
1. 
Skye:  A relationship existed between the geology of the coastline and the number of otter holts, (YOXON, 
1999), (χ2  = 32.4, df = 6, p < 0.001).  The Torridonian coastline had the greater number of holts 1.25 per 
500 metre section with the Tertiary intrusives and basalt having < 0.001 per 500 metre section. These were 
taken into account when estimating total holt numbers. 
2. 
Raasay and other islands off Skye:  As 1 
3. 
Canna:  Composed of Tertiary basalt lavas 
4. 
South Uist:  Composed of Lewisian gneiss 
5. 
Pabay:  The whole island was surveyed and no estimate was made 
6. 
Barra:  Composed of Lewisian gneiss 
7. 
Eigg:  Again it varies in geology with Jurassic sediments and Tertiary lavas 
8. 
Castle Island:  All holts counted 
9. 
Muck:  All holts counted 
10. 
Coll:  Composed of Lewisian gneiss 
11. 
Tiree:  Composed of Lewisian gneiss 
 
3.5 Otters and geology 
The Isle of Skye was studied for many years and a strong relationship was found between the 
geology of the coastal zone and otter activity (YOXON, 1999).  
The island can be divided into seven geological zones, namely: 
 
1. 
Lewisian/Moine – old Pre-Cambrian rocks to the south of the island 
2. 
Torridonian – Pre-Cambrian sediments (mainly sandstones) in south Skye 
3. 
Cambrian – limestones and sandstones 
4. 
Mesozoics – sediments mainly limestones, sandstones, siltstones 
5. 
Tertiary lavas – lava flows to the north west of the island 


 
 
 
7
6. 
Teriary intrusives – granites and gabbros in the centre of the island 
7. 
Landslips – to the north and west Skye 
 
By comparing the variables in the seven geological coastal zones certain predictable 
patterns emerged with more activity, holt numbers, sprainting points, spraint numbers and 
freshwater pools being found on the Torridonian coastal zone compared with all others.  Both the 
Tertiary lavas and Tertiary intrusive showed low numbers of each (Table 4). 
 
Table 4:  Number of 500 metre sections surveyed in each geological coastal zone and the percentage of the total 
coastal area covered by that particular geological type (Total Geology). 
 
(Activity is number of times otters were observed in 30 minutes of observation in each 500 metre coastal zone.  
Sprainting points, spraint numbers, holts and pools were found in a 100 metre wide strip along each section).  
Results show the mean numbers per 500 metre coastal section with the standard error. 
GEOLOGY 
SECTIONS 
SURVEYED 
%  TOTAL 
GEOLOGY 
OTTERS 
HOLTS 
SPRAINT 
POINTS 
SPRAINTS 
POOLS 
LEWISIAN 
71 
74 
0.03±0.02 
0.13±0.05 
0.98±0.20 
2.30±0.71 
0.42±0.14 
TORRIDONIAN 
84 
62 
0.23±0.07 
0.45±0.08 
2.5±0.28 
6.3±0.56 
1.36±0.16 
CAMBRIAN 
17 
100 
0 
0.2±0.16 
1.78±0.68 
4.6±0.68 
0.5±0.22 
MESOZOIC 
99 
100 
0.12±0.05 
0.29±0.06 
1.83±0.20 
4.5±0.54 
0.69±0.10 
TERT LAVA 
206 
37 
0 
0.05±0.02 
1.51±0.15 
2.95±0.31 
0.61±0.07 
INTRUSIVE 
104 
98 
0.02±0.01 
0.07±0.03 
1.11±0.2 
2.72±0.39 
0.47±0.10 
LANDSLIP 
41 
21 
0.05±0.03 
0.34±0.01 
2.39±0.45 
4.49±0.72 
0.73±0.21 
 
 
 
Visual observations of otter activity were recorded as otters seen per hour in each 500 
metre coastal section.  Table 5 shows the significant differences between the otter variables and 
the geological coastal zones. 
 
Table 5:  Chi-squared tests for the otter variables in relation to geology (*** = p<0.001, ** = p<0.05, ns = p>0.05).  
The null hypothesis is that no difference in the otter variables between the geological coastal zones can be ascribed 
to chance. 
 
Variable 
Χ 
Df 
P 
Otter activity 
29.1 
6 
*** 
Holts 
32.4 
6 
*** 
Sprainting points 
65.0 
6 
*** 
Spraint numbers 
83.4 
6 
*** 
Freshwater pools 
59.7 
6 
*** 
 
 
The greatest number of otters seen was in the Torridonian coastal zone (2.2 otters per 
hour observation) compared with none in the Tertiary lava and intrusive coastal zones.  Holt 
numbers were also greater in the Torridonian zone, amounting to 1.3 holts per 500 metre section 
compared with no holts in the sections surveyed in the Tertiary intrusive and lava coastal zones. 


 
 
 
8
Sprainting points were present in all zones from one per 500 metre section in the Tertiary 
intrusive zone to six in the Torridonian zone.  Total spraint numbers was greatest in the Landslip 
and Torridonian zone and lowest in the Tertiary intrusive. 
 
The final variable was the number of freshwater pools available to the otters:  the greatest 
number available was again found in the Torridonian zone (4.4 per 500 metre coastal section) 
compared with none found in the Tertiary intrusive zone. 
 
Overall therefore, the Torridonian coastal zone had the greatest number of all otter 
variables and is the most favoured habitat for otters in this study area 
 
 
4  DIET ANALYSIS USING SPRAINTS 
 
In the coastal environment, spraints are found most frequently on rocky shorelines, on well-
marked sites at the mouths of rivers, on otter runs or, at certain times of the year, at the 
entrance to holts (CONROY AND FRENCH, 1985, 1987). The droppings add nitrogen to the 
surrounding area making sprainting points very obvious: grassy areas tend to be very green 
with a prominent growth of nitrophylous grasses. Rocks may be covered by green algae, and 
some sprainting areas on the coast are without vegetation exposing soil as a result of the 
continuous addition of urine (CONROY ET AL., 1993). 
 
4.1  Analysis of spraints 
Spraints were collected for analysis and stored in labelled plastic bags. In the laboratory, 
mucus was removed by soaking for 48 hours in Co-op false teeth cleansing solution, and the 
sample was then washed and passed through a 0.5 millimetre sieve. This method has been 
used by many workers, including ERLINGE (1967, 1968), WATSON (1978) and BEJA (1995). 
The bulk of the prey remains consisted of fish bones, with occasional bird feathers, 
rabbit hair and small mammal bones. The prey was identified by comparing the fish vertebrae 
with a reference collection and/or published keys (WATSON, 1978;  CONROY ET AL., 1993). 
No method of expressing the results of spraint analysis describes the diet of otters 
accurately (WISE ET AL., 1981; KYNE ET AL., 1989; ROWE-ROWE, 1977; JENKINS ET AL., 1980; 
HEGGBERGET, 1993; CARSS, 1996).  However, the two most commonly used methods are 
described by CONROY ET AL. (1993): 
 
a) Percentage Frequency of Occurrence, where all the remains of each species in a spraint are 
taken to represent only one specimen and its frequency is calculated as the number of times it 
appears in all spraints in the sample.  It is calculated as: 
 
Number of spraints containing a particular prey item      
x 100 
Total number of spraints in sample 
 
b) Relative Frequency of Occurrence, where all the bones are identified in every spraint, and 
the frequency of each species in that spraint determined. It is calculated as: 
 
Number of occurrences of a prey in each spraint      
x100 
Total number of all prey items identified in the spraint 
 
These methods, however, have important limitations, which will be considered in the 
discussion. 


 
 
 
9
In this paper the results of spraint analysis are presented by Percentage Frequency of 
Occurrence and are shown in Table 6.  To avoid any problems with seasonality all spraint and 
survey work was undertaken in the months of July and August. 
 
Table 6:  Occurrence of prey items in otter spraints collected, expressed as Percentage Frequency of Occurrence 
 
PREY ITEMS 
SKYE  
PABAY 
BARRA 
EIGG 
TIREE 
COLL 
N 
1,480 
15 
20 
139 
12 
20 
Blenny-Viviparous 
(Zoarces viviparus) 
29.2 
22.6 
20.0 
  5.0 
32.0 
23.0 
Rockling 
(Ciliata mustela) 
18.1 
19.2 
23.2 
12.0 
15.3 
23.0 
Butterfish 
(Pholis gunnellus) 
10.0 
  9.1 
  8.5 
12.0   
14.5 
10.2 
Saithe 
(Pollachius virens) 
10.8 
 10.9 
12.3 
  2.0 
  5.0 
10.0 
Sea Scorpion 
(Myoxocephalus sp.) 
 5.5 
  3.6 
  2.4 
11.0 
  0.0 
  5.2 
Flatfish 
(Pleuronectes sp.) 
 5.0 
  6.4 
12.0 
15.0 
  8.2 
10.4 
Common Eel 
(Anguilla anguilla) 
 3.6 
  4.3 
  7.5 
  5.0 
13.1 
  3.2 
Shore Crab 
(Carcinius maenas) 
 3.6 
  2.7 
  1.0 
  9.0 
  0.0 
  2.0 
Conger Eel 
(Conger conger) 
 3.3 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Sand Eel 
(Ammodytes sp.) 
 2.2 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  1.0 
Sea Snail 
(Liparis sp.) 
 1.3 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Frog 
(Rana temporaria) 
 1.3 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Birds 
 1.1 
  3.5 
  1.6 
18.0 
  0.0 
  3.4 
Sea Stickleback 
(Gasterosteus aculeatus) 
 1.1 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  1.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Angler 
(Lophius piscatorius) 
 0.8 
  0.0 
  5.0 
  0.0 
  4.2 
  0.0 
Gobies 
(Gobius sp.) 
 0.5 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  1.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Small mammals 
(Sorex sp., Microtus sp., Apodemus) 
 0.9 
  2.4 
  6.4 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Sea Trout 
(Salmo trutta) 
 0.7 
  0.0 
  0.1 
  1.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Lumpsucker 
(Cyclopterus lumpus) 
 0.5 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
Rabbit 
(Oryctolagus cuniculus) 
 0.0 
 6.5 
  0.0 
  8.0 
  7.7 
 9.5 
Unknown 
 0.5 
  8.8 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
  0.0 
 
4.2  Comparisons with other studies 
Studies of the diet of coastal otters have been undertaken in Shetland (KRUUK ET AL., 1987; 
KRUUK AND MOORHOUSE, 1990) in Norway (HEGGBERGET AND MOEID, 1994), on Loch Broom 
(MASON AND MACDONALD, 1980) on the Isle of Mull (WATT, 1995) and on the Isle of Eigg 
(HODGSON, 2001).  The results are shown in Tables 7 and 8.  
 
 


 
 
 
10
Table 7:  Comparing principal prey taxa consumed by otters in four areas of Scotland and Norway.   
 
Data from Skye and Mull are from spraint analysis using Percentage Frequency of Occurrence. Data from Norway 
and Loch Broom were analysed using Relative Frequency of Occurrence.   Shetland data was from direct 
observation. n = the number of spraints sampled, or for Shetland the number of prey identified.   The number in 
brackets is the number of individual vertebrae. 
 
 
SPECIES 
Skye 
Mull 
Loch Broom 
Shetland 
Pabay 
Barra 
Eigg 
Coll 
Norway 
N 
Occurrences 
1,480 
(4,588) 
958 
50 
2028 
15 
20 
139 
20 
1074 
Zoarces 
viviparous 
30.5 
0 
8.6 
33.8 
22.6 
20 
5 
23 
7.9 
Chirolophis 
ascan. 
0 
5.1 
10.7 
0.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Gadidae 
28.4 
17.1 
15.7 
25.1 
30.1 
35.5 
14 
33 
17.5 
Pholis 
gunnellus 
10.8 
25.8 
11.4 
9.9 
9.1 
8.5 
12 
12 
12.4 
Cottids 
5.9 
11.8 
2.1 
17.5 
3.6 
2.4 
11 
5.2 
12.8 
Flatfish 
4.4 
3.1 
7.9 
1.9 
6.4 
12.0 
15 
10.4 
11.4 
Anguilla 
anguilla 
3.5 
7.3 
8.6 
0.2 
4.3 
7.5 
5 
3.2 
1.6 
Crab 
3.5 
7.3 
17.9 
0.2 
5.8 
1 
9 
2 
1.6 
Conger conger 
3.3 
0.2 
0 
0 
2.4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Spinachia sp 
0.8 
0 
2.1 
0.2 
1.7 
0 
1 
0 
7.7 
Gobius sp 
0.7 
2.6 
2.1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
4.9 
Salmonidae 
0.5 
0.1 
2.1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2.0 
Other 
7.7 
19.6 
10.8 
11.1 
14.0 
13.1 
27 
11.2 
20.2 
 
Spearman rank correlations were undertaken between these different areas and the results are shown in Table 8. 
 
Table 8:  Spearman Rank Correlation Coefficients (rs) comparing data from Skye, Mull, Loch Broom, Shetland and 
Norway. 
 
 
 
Mull 
Loch Broom 
Shetland 
Pabay 
Barra 
Eigg 
Coll 
Norway 
Skye 
Ns 
** 
*** 
*** 
*** 
** 
*** 
* 
Mull 
 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
* 
Ns 
Ns 
L.Broom 
 
 
* 
** 
* 
* 
** 
Ns 
Shetland 
 
 
 
*** 
*** 
* 
*** 
** 
Pabay 
 
 
 
 
*** 
** 
*** 
* 
Barra 
 
 
 
 
 
** 
*** 
* 
Eigg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
** 
* 
Coll 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
 
ns=not significant (p>0.05), *=significant (p<0.05), **=highly significant (p<0.01),  ***=very highly significant 
(p<0.001) 
 
Significant correlations exist between most areas.  Small differences did occur with more rabbits 
(Oryctolagus cuniculus) being eaten on Pabay and Eigg.   From personal observations, Pabay 
and Eigg have a lot of rabbits, which are easily available to the otter. Eigg also had a high 
proportion of gull remains in the spraint, accounting for 18% of the analysis.  Gulls are common 
on Eigg (60 pairs of common gull (Larus canus), 40 pairs of lesser black backed gulls (Larus 
fuscus), on Castle Island (just off Eigg), and 100 pairs of herring gulls (Larus argentatus) on 
Eigg itself (CHESTER, 2000).  In late summer, young gulls will be especially easy prey for an 
otter.   
 
The study identified the importance of five key prey species [viviparous blenny 
(Zoarces viviparus), five-bearded rockling (Ciliata mustela), butterfish (Pholis gunnellus), sea 
scorpion (Taurulus bubalis) and saithe (Pollachius virens)], which dominate the otter’s diet 


 
 
 
11
on all the islands. Flatfish was also an important component of the diet on the islands of 
Barra, Eigg and Coll. 
Significant correlations can be seen between the data from Skye, Shetland and Norway 
and from Shetland and Norway.  There was also a significant correlation between Mull and Loch 
Broom. 
 
Several differences have emerged in the composition of spraints between Skye and Mull, 
with viviparous blenny dominating the diet on Skye, but being absent from the diet on Mull 
(WATT, 1991) even though it is relatively common near the Marine Biological Station, Oban 
(KOOP, 1987).  In fact, five-bearded rockling were taken in very much lower numbers on Mull 
than on Skye, where they were one of the dominant prey species.  On Mull, butterfish dominated 
the diet but were taken in much lower numbers in all the other study areas.  Despite these 
differences, all these studies have in common that otters were feeding mostly on small benthic 
prey.  This suggests that even within the food category 'fish', otters are highly selective foragers 
specialising on easily caught prey species. 
 
 
5  DISCUSSION 
 
5.1  Otter population estimates 
Based on the data, the estimated otter population for these islands has been achieved by working 
out a relationship between resident females and active holts and a relationship between resident 
females and other otters. The estimate is however likely to be an underestimate because of otters 
living in inland freshwater systems.  From personal observations I have seen otters in Loch 
Suardal, Loch Coruisk and other inland freshwater lochs on Skye.  However work undertaken on 
freshwater systems on Skye showed that all spraints from freshwater lochs had evidence of 
marine fish, indicating that otters using the freshwater systems are also utilising the coast 
(GENTLE, 1999).  
 
The results can be compared with those of KRUUK ET AL. (1989) who found 0.33 resident 
females per holt and the total number of adult otters was 1.83 x the number of resident females.  
They estimated the total number of adult otters on Shetland as 718, one otter per 1.2 kilometres 
of coastline, a similar figure to that found in an earlier study on the islands (WATSON, 1978).   
 
Despite the difficulties of estimating otter numbers and the errors due to the above 
assumptions, I am confident that these results give a reasonable estimate of otter numbers on 
these islands.  The figure is lower than that reported by HARRIS ET AL. (1999), who estimated 
otter numbers of 1,000 for the west coast of Scotland and 1,200 for the Western Isles and 
Orkney.  The data presented here estimate otter numbers to be much lower, with between 370-
522 for the Western Isles and 268-380 for the Inner Hebrides.   
 
5.2  Otters and geology 
Until now, little was known about the relationship between otter utilisation of the coast and 
geology.  
 
On Shetland, MILNER (1975) categorised major coastal types and identified eight major 
coastal types using 81 physical and 18 geological attributes.  CONROY AND FRENCH (1985) 
classified the Shetland coast using over 200 attributes that were grouped into seven headings.  
Still on Shetland, KRUUK (1989) grouped the coast into six types based on evidence from maps, 
reports and prior knowledge of the area.  He found a strong relationship between numbers of 
holts and peaty coasts with little agriculture and no high cliffs and a negative association between 
holts and tall cliffs.  
 
On Orkney, in sharp contrast to Shetland, there are relatively few otters (KRUUK, 1995).  
This difference could possibly be attributed to distribution of prey species but it seems likely that 


 
 
 
12
Orkney shores are just as productive as those of Shetland. GREEN AND GREEN (1997) stated, "that 
despite the productive nature of Orkney's fresh and coastal waters, the otter population was less 
dense than those of other island regions or parts of mainland Scotland".  A more likely reason for 
the difference is the geology of the Orkney coast, which makes it a less suitable habitat for otters. 
The Torridonian sandstone on Skye is impervious and has very low porosity (TIM ASTIN, 
Department of Geology, Reading University, personal communication), allowing freshwater 
pools to build up readily on the coastal fringe.  By contrast, Devonian sandstone has a high 
degree of porosity and permeability, and so it would be difficult for freshwater pools to build up 
on these rock types in the same numbers as on the Torridonian sandstone.  The Orkney landscape 
is composed of Devonian sandstone and is well drained with rich farmland.  The low density of 
otters from Dunnett Head to the Moray Firth could equally be a consequence of the geology of 
the coastal fringes, which also consist of Devonian sandstone. 
 
5.3  Otter spraint analysis 
5.3.1  Limitations of Data 
The study was carried out over eight years from 1995 to 2003, in 11 Scottish islands.  The small 
size of the mesh of the sieve used for the preparation of the spraint for analysis ensured that all 
hard remains from commonly eaten prey were identified.   
 
The problems of interpreting data from spraint analysis have been widely discussed in the 
literature, and it appears that no single method provides a true picture of the importance of the 
different constituents of the diet (ROWE-ROWE, 1977; WISE ET AL., 1981; KRUUK ET AL., 1993). 
 
Percentage Frequency of Occurrence of prey remains is the most easily applied spraint 
analysis method, and it has been used in numerous studies (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; 
CARSS, 1996; BEJA, 1991).  However, there seems to be little agreement among authors on 
precisely how to interpret the results.   
 
 
 
The Percentage Frequency of Occurrence relies on the presence of undigested hard parts, 
therefore both soft-bodied prey and large animals, where only the flesh is eaten, will leave no 
remains in the spraints (PUTMAN, 1984).  Food which has a relatively large proportion of soft 
material and hard parts of some prey which are broken up or digested will be under-estimated.  
These methods will therefore only give an indication of what otters have eaten.  As different 
types of fish have different numbers of bones (WHEELER, 1969), and some bones are more prone 
to breakage than others (CASTEL, 1976), the relationship between the number of bones counted 
and the number of fish consumed may be tenuous.  Overall, minor items will be over-estimated 
and frequently occurring items under-estimated. While many authors accept these limitations, 
most claim that it gives a reasonable picture of the diet quoting the feeding trials undertaken by 
ERLINGE (1968).  Erlinge tested the accuracy of Percentage Frequency of Occurrence by giving 
food of a known composition to captive otters.  Spraints from these otters were then collected 
and analysed and the relative proportions of the prey categories eaten were in close agreement 
with the frequency analysis.  However, his results were not tested statistically.  
 
ROWE-ROWE (1977) suggested that the analysis of otter spraints calculated by frequency 
gave a reasonably true picture of the relative importance of the food taken but he also did not test 
this statistically.   
 
KRUUK ET AL. (1993) showed similar results from four captive otters with a strong 
correlation between the percentage of fish fed to the otters and the percentage frequency of 
identifiable remains found in the spraints (r s= 0.9; p < 0.001).  CARSS (1996) also undertook 
feeding trials on four captive otters and attempted to put confidence estimates on the analysis 
of spraints using Percentage Frequency of Occurrence.  He found strong positive correlations 
between the values obtained for each of the ten prey groups and their true proportions in the 
diet, but found it gave a poor estimate of the true proportions of prey by number or biomass 
for the ten prey groups.  (The methods over-estimated the true proportions by 5% to 2,900% 


 
 
 
13
and under-estimated by 12.5% to 50%).  He therefore concluded that for prey which does 
leave remains, Percentage Frequency of Occurrence allowed dietary items to be ranked with a 
high degree of accuracy, but gave poor estimates of the true percentage proportions of the 
various prey groups in the diet.  CARSS (1996) also found that prey was over-estimated if 
sequentially deposited spraints are collected regularly from frequently used sites. 
 
The assumption that each occurrence of a prey item in different spraints represents a 
single individual animal is not necessarily true;  CARSS (1996) found the remains of seven fish of 
a similar size recorded in a single spraint and therefore spraints cannot be assumed to represent a 
single prey item. 
 
In Shetland, KRUUK AND MOORHOUSE (1990) used direct observations to assess the 
diet of otters and their results showed close agreement with those undertaken by HERFST 
(1984) using spraint analysis by Percentage Frequency of Occurrence.  The inaccuracies of 
this method are therefore assumed to be acceptable within the aims and limitations of this 
study.  
 
Given these difficulties, Percentage Frequency Analysis has the advantage of being 
relatively quick compared to more complex and not necessarily more accurate methods of 
analysis. [Counting all vertebrae and volumetric analysis has not been found to be more accurate 
(WATT, 1995)].  Any bias which does occur is likely to operate on all the samples equally.  Thus, 
they should not effect conclusions with regard to seasonal and area-related trends within a taxon 
(WISE ET AL., 1981) or comparisons with other studies using similar methods of analysis. A 
further problem could be pseudo-replication whereby one meal contributes to a number of 
spraints.  It is not inconceivable that some adjacent spraints may have come from the same meal.  
However, this potential difficulty in statistical analysis has been ignored in this and previous 
studies. 
 
5.4  Comparisons with other studies 
Studies of the diet of coastal otters have been undertaken in Shetland (KRUUK ET AL., 1987; 
KRUUK AND MOORHOUSE, 1990), in Norway (HEGGBERGET AND MOSEID, 1994), on Loch 
Broom (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1980), the Isle of Mull (WATT, 1995), and on the Isle of 
Eigg (HODGSON, 2001).  These all show the importance of the same five key prey species 
(viviparous blenny, five-bearded rockling, butterfish, sea scorpion and saithe) to the diet of 
the otter population. 
 
 
6  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
I would like to thank the following people who took part in the surveys over the years and 
climbed boulders above and beyond the call of duty. Sara Calhim, Dick Collin, the late Alison 
Collyer, Peter Collyer, Tim Corke, Liz Cornish, Vera Cranmer, Sherry Fuller, Lorraine 
Gibson, Terry Gibson, Karen Goold, Alex Hardy, Helen Hardy, Margaret Hunter, the late 
Margaret Hutchinson, Sara Jupp, Tracey King, Dawn Mannerings, Justine Millard, Ruth 
Moffatt, Ray Morton, John Noorani, Alison Northeast, Clive Northeast, Andy Rothwell, 
Sylvia Sadler, Mary Taylor, Ruth Thomson, Lisbeth Tuckey, Barbara Wild and Grace Yoxon. 
 
 
7  REFERENCES  
 
BEJA, P.R. 1995. Structure and seasonal fluctuations of rocky littoral fish assemblages in south west Portugal. 
Journal of the Marine Biological Association UK, 75: 833-83 7. 
CASTEL, R.W. 1976.  Fish remains in archaeology and palaeo-environment studies.  Academic Press.  London. 


 
 
 
14
CARSS, D.N. 1996. Errors associated with otter (Lutra lutra,) faecal analysis. Assessing general diet from 
spraints. Journal of the Zoological Society, London, 238: 301-3 17. 
CHESTER, J.  2000. Birds of Eigg Report 2000. Scottish Wildlife Trust. 
CONROY, J.W.H. AND FRENCH, D.D. 1985. Monitoring otters in Shetland. Shell Oil Terminal Report. 
CONROY, J.W.H. AND FRENCH, D.D. 1987. The use of spraints to monitor populations of otters (Lutra lutra). 
Symposium of the Zoological Society of London, 58: 247-262. 
CONROY, J.W.H., WATT, I., WEBB, J.B. AND JONES, A. 1993. A guide to the identification of prey in otter 
spraint. Occasional publication  of the Mammal Society, London. 16. 
ERLINGE, S. 1967. Home range of the otter (Lutra lutra) in southern Sweden. Oikos, 18: 379-97. 
ERLINGE, S. 1968. Territoriality of the otter (Lutra lutra). Oikos, 19: 81-98. 
GENTLE, M.E. 1999.  The diet of otters (Lutra lutra) in five freshwater areas on the Isle of Skye, north west 
Scotland. BSc thesis University of East Anglia. 
GREEN, J. AND GREEN, R. 1980. Otter Survey of Scotland 1977-1979. Vincent Wildlife Trust. London. 
GREEN, J. AND GREEN, R. 1987. Otter Survey of Scotland 1984-1985. Vincent Wildlife Trust. London. 
GREEN, J. AND GREEN, R. 1997. Otter Survey of Scotland 1991-1994. Vincent Wildlife Trust. London. 
JENKINS, D., WALKER, J.G.K. AND MCCOWAN, D. 1979. Analysis of otter (Lutra lutra) faeces from Deeside, 
north east Scotland. Journal of the Zoological Society of London, 187: 235-44. 
HARRIS, S., MORRIS, P., WRAY, S. AND YALDEN, D. 1995. A review of British mammals:  population estimates 
and conservation status of British mammals other than cetaceans. JNCC Peterborough. 
HEGGBERGET, T.M. 1993. Marine feeding otters (Lutra lutra) in Norway: Seasonal variation in prey and 
reproductive timing. Journal of the Marine Biological Association, 73: 297-312. 
HEGGBERGET, T.M. AND MOSEID, K.E. 1994.  Prey selection of coastal otters (Lutra lutra).  Ecogeography, 17: 
331-338. 
HERFST, M.  1984.  Habitat and food of the otter (Lutra lutra) in Shetland.  Lutra, 25: 57-70. 
HODGSON, K.  2001.  The diet of marine feeding otters (Lutra lutra) on the Isle of Eigg, north west Scotland. 
BSc Thesis, University of Plymouth. 
JOLLY, G.M. 1969. The treatment of errors in aerial counts of wildlife populations. East African Agriculture and 
Forestry Journal, 34: 50-5 5. 
KOOP, J.  1987.  Aspects of behaviour of marine fishes used by otters (Lutra lutra).  Marine Research 
Laboratory, Dunstaffinage, by Oban. 
KRUUK, H., CONROY, J.W.H. AND GILMERTON, U. 1986. The use of spraints to survey populations of otters, 
(Lutra lutra). Biological Conservation, 35: 187-194. 
KRUUK, H. AND CONROY, J.W.H. 1987. Surveying otter (Lutra lutra) populations; a discussion of problems 
with spraints. Biological Conservation, 141: 179-183. 
KRUUK, H., CONROY, J.W. H. AND MOORHOUSE, A. 1987. Seasonal, reproduction. mortality and food of otters 
(Lutra lutra) in Shetland. Symposium of the Zoological Society of London, 58: 263-278. 
KRUUK, H., MOORHOUSE, A., CONROY, J.W.H. AND DURBIN, L. 1989. An estimate of numbers and habitat 
preferences of otters (Lutra lutra) in Shetland.  Biological Conservation, 49: 241-254. 
KRUUK, H. AND MOORHOUSE, A.  1990.  Seasonal and spatial differences in food selection by otters (Lutra 
lutra) in Shetland.  Journal of the Zoological Society of London, 221: 621-637. 
KRUUK, H. CARRS, D.N, CONROY, J.W.H. AND DURBIN, L.  1993.  Otter (Lutra lutra) numbers and fish 
productivity in rivers in north east Scotland.  Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, 65: 171-191 
KYNE, M.J., SMALL, C.M. AND FAIRLEY, I.S. 1989. The food of otters (Lutra lutra) in the Irish midlands and a 
comparison with that of mink (Mustela vison). Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, 89B: 33-46. 
MASON, C.F. AND MACDONALD, S.M.  1980.  The winter diet of otters (Lutra lutra) on a Scottish sea loch.  
Journal of the Zoological Society of London, 192, 555-561. 
MILNER, C.  1975.  The coast of Shetland.  Institute of Terrestrial Ecology.  Banchory 
MOORHOUSE, A. 1988. Distribution of holts and their utilisation by the European otter (Lutra lutra) in a marine 
environment. MSc Thesis, University of Aberdeen. 
PUTMAN, R.J.  1984.  Facts from faeces.  Mammal Review, 14, 79-97. 
ROWE-ROWE, D.T. 1977. Food ecology of otters in Natal, South Africa. Oikos, 28:         210-219. 
SOUTHWOOD, T.R.E. 1966. Ecological methods. Chapman and Hall, London and New York 
STUBBS, M. 1977. Density dependence in the life cycles of animals and the importance in k and r strategies. 
Journal of Animal Ecology, 46: 677-688. 
WATT, J.P.  1991.  Prey selection of coastal otters (Lutra lutra) on the Isle of Mull.  PhD thesis, Aberdeen 
University. 
WATT, J.P.  1995.  Seasonal and area related variations in the diet of the otter (Lutra lutra) on Mull.  Journal of 
the Zoological Society of London, 237: 179-184. 
WATSON, H. 1978. Coastal otters (Lutra lutra) in Shetland. Vincent Wildlife Trust. London. 


 
 
 
15
WISE, M.H., LINN, I.J. AND KENNEDY, C.R. 1981. Comparisons of the feeding biology of mink (Mustela vison) 
and otter (Lutra lutra). Journal of the Zoological Society of London, 195: 181-213. 
YOXON, P. AND YOXON G.M. 1986.  Otter survey of the Isle of Canna.  IOSF publication. 
YOXON, P.  1999. The effect of geology on the distribution of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) on the Isle of 
Skye. Phd Thesis, Open University, Milton Keynes. 
YOXON, P. AND YOXON G. M. 1999.  Otter survey of Pabay. Isle of Pabay Web site 
YOXON, P. AND YOXON G. M. 2000.  Otter Survey of Barra. IOSF publication. 
YOXON, P. AND YOXON G. M. 2002.  Otter survey of Coll. IOSF publication. 
YOXON, P. AND YOXON G. M. 2003.  Otter survey of Tiree. IOSF publication. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
