--- 
source: 2007-19.pdf
--- 

Biological Services Program
and
Division of Ecological Services
FWS/OBS-82/10.A
SEPTEMBER 1982
ibrary
'r.
Service
e
ese rc
Center
7
: n Don e 80 levard
Lafaye
e, Louisian
70506
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
APPENDIX A. GUIDELINES FOR RIVERINE
AND LACUSTRINE APPLICATIONS OF FISH
"HSI MODELS WITH THE HABITAT
5~<:EVAL UAT I O N PROCEDURES
-~
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior


Th' 8iolO9ical Services Program was established within the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Servici to supply scientific informttion and methodo1ogils on
key environmental issuls that impact fish and wildlife resources and their
supporting ecosystems.
The mission of tht program is as follows:
•
To strengthln the Fish and Wildlife service in its role as
a primlry SO\lrce of ;nforlllltion on national fish and wild-
lift resources, particularly in respect to environmental
impact assessment.
•
To gather, an.1y%e. and present information that will aid
dec1sionmakers
11'1 the identification and resolution of
problems assoeiated with Major changls in land and water
use.
I
To provide blttlr Icologicl1 information and Iva1uation
for Department of the Interior dtvtlopment programs. such
as those relating to energy development.
Information d.veloped by the Biological Services Program is intended
for use in tht planning and decisionmaking process to prevent or minimize
the impact of development on fish and wildlife.
Research activities and
technical assistance services arl based on an analysis of the issues. a
determination of the
d~isionmak8rs involved and thlir information needs.
and an evaluation of the state of the art to identify information gaps
and to determine priorities.
This is I strategy that will ensure that
.
t~e products produced and disseminated are timely and useful.
Projects have been initiated in the following areas:
COil extraction
and conversion; power plants; geothermal. mineral Ind oil shale develop·
ment; water rlsource analysis. including stream alterations and wlstern
water allocation. cOlstal ecosystems and Outlr Continental Shelf develop-
ment; and systems inventory, including National Wetland Invlntory.
habitat classification and analysis. and information transfer.
The Biological Services Program consists of the Office of Biological
Services 1n Washington. D.C.• which is responsible for overall planning and
mana9~nt; National Teams. which provide the Program's central scientific
and technical expertise and arrange for contracting
bio1o~ical services
studies with states. universities. consulting firms, and otherSi Regional
Staffs. who provide a link to problems at the operating leveliand staffs at
certain Fish and Wildlife Service research facilities. who conduct in-house
research studies.
This appendt xis des i gned to be used by the Di vi si on of Eco1og1 ca1 Serv;ces
in conjunctlon 'wi t h the Habf ta.t Evaluation Procedures.


FWS/OBS-82/10.A
September 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
APPENDIX A.
GUIDELINES FOR
RIVERINE AND LACUSTRINE APPLICATIONS OF FISH HSI
MODELS WITH THE HABITAT EVALUATION PROCEDURES
by
James W. Terrell
Thomas E. McMahon
Peter D. Inskip
Robert F. Raleigh
Kathryn L. Williamson
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins,
CO
80526
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington,
DC
20240


This report should be cited as:
Terrell, J. W.,
T. E. McMahon,
P. D. Inskip,
R. F. Raleigh,
and K.
L.
Williamson.
1982.
Habitat
suitability
index
models:
Appendix A.
Guidelines for riverine and lacustrine
applications
of fish
HSI models
with
the
Habitat
Evaluation
Procedures.
U.S.
Dept.
Int.,
Fish Wildl.
Servo
FWS/OBS-82/10.A.
54 pp.


PREFACE
This appendix was developed in response to
requests to provide guidance
in
the field
application
of the Habitat Suitability Index (HSI) models pre-
sented in this series.
Many of these models are based on a large
number of
suitability
index
graphs
and
are
designed
as
a first
step
in
developing
research hypotheses.
They are not especially suitable for
quick assessments
of
fish
habitat.
This
appendix
provides some general
guidelines on how the
mode1s, based on sui tabi 1i ty index graphs,
can be used to deve lop a model
to
meet
the
specific
planning
objectives
of
a
HEP
application.
Methods for
predicting future values of selected aquatic habitat variables are reviewed.
The recommendations and techniques described in this appendix are
based
on the
assumption
that users
of
the
Habi tat
Eva 1uati on Procedures
wi 11
be
interested primarily in developing a habitat ratl nq , based
on a single site
visit, that characterizes the habitat with a single number.
Users who expect
to
deal
with
the
development
of
instream
flow
recommendations,
which
may
require a more dynamic representation of aquatic systems, may wish to examine
the summary of instream flow methods developed by Wesche and Rechard (1980).1
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service encourages users of this appendix and
the various Habitat Suitability Index models to convey comments and suggestions
that might help us increase the utility and effectivenss of the habitat-based
approach to planning.
Please send comments to:
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
2625 Redwing Road
Ft. Collins,
CO
80526
1Wesche, T. A., and P. A. Rechard.
1980.
A summary of instream flow methods
for fisheries and related research needs.
Eisenhower Consortium for Western
Environmental Forestry Research.
Bulletin 9.
U.S. Government Printing Office,
Publication Number 1980-0-679-417/509.
122
p~.
iii


CONTENTS
PREFACE.............................................................
iii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
v
PURPOSE.............................................................
A.l
PREFIELD ACTIVITIES
A.l
ACQUIRING AN HSI MODEL
A.2
Examples and Limitations of HSI Models
A.5
Model Modifications...............................................
A.ll
DETERMINING THE HSI
FOR AVAILABLE HABITAT.....
A.15
Selecting Riverine Sample Sites
A.15
Selecting Lacustrine Sample Sites .. ,
A.16
Recording Field Data..............................................
A.16
Variable Estimation for Existing Conditions.....
A.16
PREDICTING FUTURE HSI 's. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .
A.20
Temperature
A.21
Phosphorus and Nitrogen
A.23
Transparency......................................................
A.25
Dissolved Oxygen..................................................
A.25
Basin Configuration...............................................
A.26
Stream Width, Depth, and Velocity...
A.26
Aquatic and Wetland Vegetation
A.27
RIVERINE AND LACUSTRINE DATA RECORDS....
A.29
Riverine Data Record..............................................
A.29
Lacustri ne Data Record
A.41
REFERENCES..........................................................
A.46
iv


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would
1ike
to
than k Tom Huph,
Corl in Cook,
Eri c Bergersen,
Charl ene
Smith, Denwood Butler, Mel Schamberger, and Dave Curtis for their comments and
suggestions
for
improvements
of
earlier
manuscripts.
Word
processing
was
provided
by Dora Ibarra
and
Carolyn Gulzow.
The cover of this document was
illustrated by Jennifer Shoemaker.
Editing was provided by Cathy Short.
v


APPENDIX A.
GUIDELINES FOR RIVERINE AND LACUSTRINE APPLICATIONS OF FISH
HSI MODELS WITH THE HABITAT EVALUATION PROCEDURES
PURPOSE
Use
of
the
Habitat
Evaluation
Procedures
(HEP;
U.S.
Fish
and Wildlife
Service
1980a)
requires
a
numerical
rating
(Habitat
Suitability
Index)
of
habitat under pre- and post-project conditions.
The Habitat Suitability Index
(HSI) models, published and referenced in this series, present a broad spectrum
of
approaches
to describing
habitat
that
may
be
useful
in
providing
this
numerical description.
The models
have varying levels of precision, general-
ity, and realism and can be adapted to a variety of planning uses.
Development and use of HSI models requires a clear understanding of the
habitat
requirements of
the
species
being
evaluated, the characteristics of
different types of
HSI models,
and the objectives of
the
study.
The models
published
in
this
series
provide
a basic
understanding
of
species habitat
requirements.
This appendix discusses the characteristics of different types
of
HSI models and describes when and how to
use the different model types in
order to complete six of the tasks that are part of a HEP application.
These
tasks, and the related section in the Habitat Evaluation Procedures (U.S.
Fish
and Wildlife Service 1980a), are as follows:
(1) define the study area bound-
aries (Section 3.1); (2) develop aquatic guilds (Section 3.3B); (3) calculate
the total
area
of
available
habitat
(Section 4.1);
(4) acquire
HSI
models
(Section 4.2B);
(5) determine
the
HSI
for available habitat (Section 4.2C);
and (6) predict future HSI's (Section 5.2C).
Completion
of
the
first
three
tasks
(defining
study
area
boundaries,
developing aquatic guilds, and calculating total area of available habitat) is
an activity normally completed prior to
collection
or
analysis
of
extensive
field data and is described below under "Prefield Activities."
Completion of
the last three tasks is often more time consuming and involves a close examina-
tion of available models and information on habitat requirements,
as well as
the
planning
and completion
of data
collection
in
relationship
to
project
goals.
Completion of each of these last three tasks is described separately.
PREFIELD ACTIVITIES
The
boundaries
of
the
study
area
should
include
sites
where
actual
physical impacts will occur and contiguous areas that are biologically linked
to the site of physical
impact where secondary changes are anticipated (U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service 1980a).
Determination of this linkage requires an
understanding of the life history and habitat requirements of each evaluation
A.l


species.
This information is available in the Habitat Use Information section
and
in
publications
listed
in
the
References
Cited
section
of
the
Habitat
Suitability Index models in this series.
One of the methods descri bed in
U. S.
Fish and Wil dl ife Servi ce (l980a)
for broadening the ecological perspective of a HEP assessment is to use species
that represent groups (guilds) of species that utilize a common environmental
resource.
Classification of all
study area species into guilds often will be
a useful
step prior to the selection of evaluation species.
The Habitat Use
Information and References Cited sections of the individual species HSI models
in this
series
provide the
information
necessary
to
classify
species
into
aquatic guilds.
Figure A-I is
an example of a guild descriptor matrix that
summarizes habitat use information for selected species.
Use of the matrix in
Figure A-I shows that bluegill,
for example, could be selected as represent-
ative of a group of fishes that utilize both warmwater temperatures and back-
waters.
The guilds developed
from this matrix can be based on two or more
column descriptors (e.g., coldwater and rocky substrate), rather than a single
major category,
such as temperature.
The guilds selected will depend on the
descriptors necessary to meet the objectives
of
the
HEP application.
Guild
descriptors
can
be
based
on tolerances
of,
or
responses to,
a particular
habitat alteration (e.g., turbidity) or on specific requirements for complet-
ing
the
life cycle.
Figure A-2 is
provided as
a worksheet
to
display the
habitat requirements of additional species of interest.
Available habitat is defined as
the
surface area
capable
of
providing
direct life support for an evaluation species (U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
1981).
Determination of the total area of available habitat is necessary for
the calculation of species Habitat Units and must be done for each evaluation
species for every set of present or future conditions analyzed with HEP.
This
determination does not require a precise model of the species habitat require-
ments but does require criteria for classifying habitat as "capable" or "not
capable" of providing direct support.
For example, if lacustrine habitat does
not provide direct
support for
any 1ife
stage of
a selected species,
then
lacustrine areas
should be excluded from calculations of
area of available
habitat for that particular species.
The Model Applicability and Habitat Use
Information
sections of
the
HSI
models
in this
series describe the type of
habitat normally
inhabitated by the evaluation
species
and may
be
used
to
identify parts of the study area that qualify as available habitat.
ACQUIRING AN HSI MODEL
An HSI is a unitless number bounded by 0 and 1, where 0 indicates unsuit-
able habitat and 1 indicates optimum habitat (U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
1980a).
The Habitat Evaluation Procedures can be used with any method of HSI
determination,
as long as the method is clearly described.
The
recommended
method of determining this index is with an HSI model that provides either a
verbal
or mathematical comparison of the habitat being
evaluated to
optimum
habitat for
a particular evaluation
species (U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
1981).
The HSI models in this series can be used as presented or modified or
A.2


>,Q)
(nIP
DOL <)
45~H
x
x
x
x
+-'u
X
.~ t:
-010
(niP 00L-sz) a:pl.1apOW
.~
~
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
..cQ)
~~
(niP 5l
»
MOl
::JO
x
x
I-+-'
sa:p!.I=lsqns
JO
~=la~.IeA e .IaAO
pa=l~sodap S003
s~.Iqap =lueLd .10
x
x
x
x
x
x
'pues 'pnw JO sasau
u~
pa=l~sodap S003
..c
'sa L04
pa=l~sodap S003
C>
san ~AeJ
u~
x
t:
.~
s=lUeLd uo paaj sodap s063
x
x
t:
X
~
10
pa.l~nba.l =lua.l.lnJ ou
~sa=le.l=ls
0.
VI
-qns
~~JO.l UO .10
u~
pa=l~sodap S003
pa.l~nba.l =lua.l.lnJ
~ sa=lens
x
x
x
-qns
~JO.l uo .10
u~ paHsodap s503
·ba.l a=le.l=lsqns ou 'sooa
OU~=lJ~.Ip-aa.l~
x
'10
(:lo8l <) w.leM
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
s,Q)Q)
(:lo8l-0l)
o.~
L00:l
x
x
x
E
::J
Q)+-'
(:loOl »
1-10
PL°:l
x
spaau .IallOJ Lepads ON
x
saj j d sj.iqap '4 sn.lq 'sool
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
s,
Q)
s~ueq-=ln:l
>
x
x
x
e
0u
uO~=le=laOaA
J~JenbV
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
a=le.l=lsqns
~JO"ll
x
x
x
x
x
(w 5L <) daaa
x
x
x
x
X
I
s,
Q)
t:Q)
(w 5L-5)
.Ia=leM-p~w
x
x
t:
+-'
Q)+-,
X
X
X
.~
lIS
0.10
+-'
O~
(w 5 »
aJeJ.lns
+-'
:c;
x
x
x
x
VI
::J
10
•
Q)
(w 5 <) daaa
u
:I:
~~
X
X
X
X
X
X
10
100
--J
Q)..r:
(w 5 »
MOLL e4S
ZVI
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
+5 :.Iap.lo qw O£ <) aO.lel
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
E
10
Q)
9-l :.Iap.lo ~(w O£-S)
wn~paw
Q)N
x
x
X
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Q)
~.~
t:
+-'VI
£-L :.rap.ro
~ (w 5 »
LLews
.~
VI
x
x
x
s,
Q)
sa~e L MOqXO
'sno~eq
's.la=leM~Je8
>
+-'
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
~
10
+-'
sa~ppa 'SLoOd
.~
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
..c
10
sun.r 'saLJ·,H"ll
x
:I:
x
X
X
X
0
s,
~
Q)
10
~
II>
4-
.s:
U
II>
4-
II>
::J
10
Q)
Q)
s,
::J
.~
II>
+-'
..c
II>
.~
.~
Q)
..c
4-
s,
C>
II>
::J
II>
0.
0.
+-'
0.
+-'
Q)
0
II>
0
.s:
10
0.
0.
s,
s,
.s:
10
~
.s:
10
s,
+-'
..c
10
10
10
10
+-'
U
U
..c
+-'
u
::J
s,
s,
~
.s:
-0
U
::J
::l
t:
II>
0
-0
U
U
~
+-'
0
~
VI
s,
-0
~
Q)
E
Q)
.~
::J
.s:
t:
E
Q)
Q)
Q)
0
.~
Q)
+-'
~
Q)
C>
0
C>
0
~
t:
Q)
.s:
0.
..c
u
C>
+-'
U
+-'
Q)
E
::J
~
~
t:
+-'
+-'
.~
t:
Q)
~
0
10
.~
::J
~
0
10
10
.~
~
~
.~
0.
10
0.
~
..r:
~
10
~
0
E
..r:
..r:
0
+-'
10
'---
VI
--J
VI
co
3:
co
3:
VI
U
VI
U
3:
Z
VI
ex:
A.3
l::o
Vl
l::
n::l
..:.t:-o:c
Eos,
4-
Vl
OJ
......s,o
C)
OJ
+->
n::l
U
n::l


CT
PI
(J
(J
PI
PI
rt
rt
CD
CD
~
~
0
0
-S
-S
......
......
CD
CD
VI
VI
......
......
-S
-S
0
0
3
3
OJ
:c
PI
0
--'
7'
0
PI
::s
::s
VI
~
0
--'
::s
1.0
-.....J
~
"'T]
(J'l
--'
......
-....-
1.0
co
-.....J
C
-.....J
-S
CD
)::0
I
N.
Ci)
C......
--'
0-
......
::s
lCl
(')
-S......
rt
CD
-S......
PI
.......
0
-S
.......
-S
CD
VI::r
~
PIrt
CD
-S
......
......
VI::r
CD
VI
17'\1
til
"0ro
0
~.
ro
Vl
Riffles, runs
:::r::
PJ
0"
Pools, eddies
~.
c+
;;0
PJ
~.
Backwaters, bayous, oxbow lakes
c+
<ro
Small
«
5 m}; order: 1-3
-s
til
~.
Vlc+
::::>
Medium (5-30 m); order: 2-6
~.-s
ro
N ro
ro PJ
Large (> 30 m); order: 5+
3
Shallow «
5 m)
VlZ
::rro
r-
Deep (> 5 m)
OPJ
PJ
-s-s
:::r::
0
roo
PJ
<::
Surface «
5 m)
0"
Vl
~.
c+
::<:0
c+
-s
Mid-water (5-15 m)
PJ"O
PJ
~.
c+ro
c+
::::>
ro::::>
ro
Deep (> 15 m)
-s •
Rocky substrate
Aquatic vegetation
n0
Cut-banks
<ro
Logs, brush, debris piles
-s
No special cover needs
Cold «
20°C)
PJ-l
c+ro
Cool (20-28°C)
<::3
,"0
ro ro
Warm (> 28°C)
-s
PJ•
Free-drifting eggs, no substrate req .
Eggs deposited in or on rocky sub-
strates; current required
Eggs deposited in or on rocky sub-
Vl
strates; no current required
"0PJ
::<:
Eggs deposited on plants
::::>
~.
::::>
Eggs deposited in holes, cavities
<C
0"
Eggs deposited in nests of mud, sand,
or plant debris
Eggs deposited over a variety of
substrates
Low «
25 JTU)
c+-l
0<::
~,
Moderate (25-100 JTU)
roO"
,
~.
PJO-
High (> 100 JTU)
::::>
~.
oc+
ro,<


other models can be used.
The assumptions,
limitations, accuracy, and data
requirements of
each
HSI
model
should be evaluated
in
relationship
to
the
objectives and constraints of the individual HEP application prior to selecting
a particular HSI model.
Any indices of habitat quality developed specifically
for the study area also should be considered.
In order to determine if region-
specific models,
or the models presented in this series, are
suitable for
a
particular HEP application,
the three general steps of HSI model construction
listed
"in
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
(1981)
should
be
reviewed (i.e.,
establish the model objectives, identify the habitat variables that are related
to the model objectives, and define model
relationships that combine measure-
ments
of
the
habitat
variables
in
such
a
way
that
model
objectives
are
achieved).
A "stafldard" HSI model for HEP does not exist.
The models in this series
are a starting point for the development of models for a specific study.
The
evaluation and use of the fish HSI models presented in this series to complete
the three steps of
HSI model
construction for site specific
HEP applications
requires an understanding of model attributes and limitations and methods for
model
modification.
This
information
is
provided
in
the next two sections.
Sources of additional species-habitat information for developing or modifying
HSI models are described in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (1981).
Examples and Limitations of HSI Models
The attributes
and
1imitations
of
HSI
model s
necessari ly
reflect the
attributes, limitations, and goals of the HEP approach to environmental assess-
ment.
HSI models used with
HEP must consist of habitat variables:
(1) whose
importance to the evaluation species can be documented (U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service 1980a); (2) that are quantifiable; (3) whose values can be measured or
predicted under various habitat conditions in the present and, if necessary to
meet project goals, the future.
Fish models currently included or referenced in this series are of three
general types:
(1) regression models that predict a measurable response,
such
as
standing
crop
or
harvest,
from environmental
variables;
(2) descriptive
(verbal) models that assign an HSI based on the presence or absence of spec-
ified
levels
of
environmental
variables;
and
(3) mechanistic
models
that
describe
suitability
index
ratings
for
individual
variables
and
aggregate
those ratings into an HSI that is based on hypothesized causal relationships
between variable values and habitat suitability.
These three types of models
are discussed separately below.
Regression models.
Regression
models
are
commonly
used
for
resource
planning in reservoirs (e.g., Leidy and Jenkins 1977) and streams (e.g., Binns
and
Eiserman
1979).
Regression
models developed
by the
National
Reservoir
Research Program have
been
used
as
planning
tools
since
the
late
1960's.
Regression models identify the major habitat features within a particular set
of streams or reservoirs that "explain", or account for, most of the variation
in standing crop or harvest within the chosen data set.
Regression models are
appeal ing
and useful
planning
tool s because predictions
based
on the
model
A.5


have
known
accuracy
levels
in relation to the original data sets.
They can
give an indirect but relatively accurate answer to specific planning questions
(Romesburg 1981).
Regression models are an example of the empirical approach
to problem solving which Rigler (1982) described as essential
for the devel-
opment of new predictive theories in environmental science.
The major limita-
tion
of
regression
models is that,
although
they
may
indicate
which
envi-
ronmental
variables
are
important
in
determining
the response of a species,
they do not explain why.
If the models are used to make predictions
from a
new data set and fail, there are few clues as to the cause of failure.
Regres-
sion models also are relatively inflexible; they cannot be readily modified to
include
site
specific
considerations
without
completing
a
new
regression
analyses of
the
new data set.
One method to
obtain
maximum
accuracy
from
regression models is to limit their use to cases where environmental conditions
are similar to those present in the data base used to construct the model.
If
this is not possible, a simple hypothesis of why the regression model variables
are important should be developed.
If the
new environmental conditions being
evaluated seem consistent with the hypothesis, the model would be used to make
predictions from the new data set.
Regression
HSI models have been developed for sixteen warmwater species
for
HEP
applications
in
reservoirs
(Aggus and Morais
1979).
The
National
Reservoir Research Program maintains a set of regression formulas for predict-
ing
fish
standing
crop and harvest in reservoirs.
These models can provide
relatively rapid determinations of
studying
crop or
harvest
under
pre-
and
post-project conditions.
They do not require extensive field sampling because
most of the variable measurements usually can be based on data obtained from
construction agencies.
The coefficient of determination
(R2 )
and number of
reservoirs
used for
each
species
or
species-group
regression
equation
are
given.
This
provides a description of the efficiency of
the
regression in
explaining variability in standing crop or harvest in the original data set.
Limitations of these models coincide with the limitations presented above for
regression models in general.
Descriptive models.
Descriptive
HSI
models
in
this
series
consist
of
environmental variables that are judged most important to the species by the
model
author(s).
Specific cause
and effect relationships
between variables
and life requisites,
such as food,
are not hypothesized.
Habitat ratings are
based on the presence or absence of optimal values of selected variables or on
combinations of specific levels of selected variables.
Examples of these two
types of descriptive
models are Additional
Modell
for
the channel
catfish
(McMahon and Terrell 1982) and the models presented in McConnell et al. (1982).
These types
of descriptive models:
1) provide
a
rapid
means
of
comparing
habitat conditions; 2) are easily modified to meet project goals; 3) generally
require few or no extensive field measurements; and 4) can be utilized as low
effort
evaluation
tools
prior
to
the
application
of
more detailed models.
Major limitations are that they provide limited insight into how the variables
interact and have unknown accuracy.
These models can be made more representa-
tive of perceived species-habitat relationships
by increasing the detail
of
the word descriptions that comprise the model (U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
1981).
A.6


Mechanistic models based on suitability indices.
Models
based
on
the
aggregation
of suitability indices for selected habitat variables follow the
"mechan i sti c''
approach to
HSI
model
deve1opment descri bed in
U. S.
Fish and
Wildlife Service (1981).
Mechanistic models are constructed as a hierarchical
set of hypotheses about species-habitat relationships based on the documented
opinion
of
model
author(s).
The
hypotheses
are
developed
in
four
stages
during the process of model
construction.
First,
variables are
chosen
that
represent key habitat features known to affect the growth, survival, abundance,
standing crop, distribution, or other measure of habitat quality for a species.
Second,
the relationship between each habitat variable and carrying capacity
(= habitat suitability) for the species is translated into a graphic hypoth-
esi?
(= suitability index graph).
Third, habitat variables are aggregated via
mathematical equations into the model components of Food, Cover, Water Quality,
and Repr-cduc t ton."
Last, the model
components are aggregated into a species
HSI equation that yields a single numerical description of habitat suitabil-
ity.
Because specific data on variable interactions are often lacking, model
builders
may
have to
develop
assumptions
on
how
the
variables
combine to
determine
habitat suitability.
These assumptions are translated into simple
mathemati ca1 1anguage.
The use of
mathemati ca1 1anguage
resul ts ina
model
that can produce an index with several decimal
places.
The number of decimal
places does necessarily imply a certain level of accuracy.
Mechanistic models have several attributes that make them
usef~l as tools
in environmental planning.
The basic model structure allows incorporation and
integration
of
a wide
variety
of
existing
knowledge and
hypotheses
about
species-habitat relationships.
Therefore, a species HSI can be determined for
a wide variety of existing and potential habitat conditions.
In addition, the
model structure enables environmental planners to easily track habitat changes
that
have
the
most effect
on overall
habitat
suitability
for
a
species.
Tracking
can
occur between different sites at one point in time or for one
site at several points in time.
Mechanistic models can readily be modified to
incorporate new information on habitat requirements and site specific consid-
erations, thereby providing the user with a high degree of flexibility to meet
project goals.
To a large extent, however, the flexibility is a result of the
subjective use of existing data.
The subjectivity involved in model develop-
ment and the level
of precision likely to be obtained with both the original
and
altered
models
should
be
understood
prior
to
using
or
modifying
a
mechanistic model.
Potential
sources of subjectivity in model development are listed below
and described in detail:
(1) determining which variables should be included
in the model; (2) developing suitability index graphs from often contradictory
or
incomplete
data;
(3) incorporating
information
for
similar
species
or
different life stages in the suitability index graphs; (4) determining whether
2An
\I ot her\l model
component can be added to incorporate model variables that
cannot be classified according to one of these four components.
Model vari-
ables also can be classified into life-stage components to form a life-stage
model structure, if so desired.
A.7


or not highly correlated variables really affect habitat suitability independ-
ently
and
which
variables,
if
any,
should
be
el iminated
from
the
model;
(5) determining when, where,
and how model
variables should be measured;
and
(6) converting
assumed
relationships
between
variables
into
mathematical
equations that aggregate suitability indices for individual variables into
a
species HSI.
Many
factors
potentially
can
affect
carrying
capacity
for
a species.
Model builders must decide which factors are most important within the follow-
ing constraints.
First, available information must be sufficient to develop a
hypothesized relationship between the potential model variable and some direct
or Jndirect measure of carrying capacity or habitat quality for a species that
is acceptable to model
users.
For example,
turbidity was
chosen
as
a model
variable in the creek chub HSI model (McMahon 1982) because abundance of creek
chubs varies indirectly with turbidity level.
Second, model variables must be
quantifiable and have a measurable and predictable value under various habitat
conditions
to
qualify
for
use
in
HSI
models
with
HEP.
When
factors
are
believed to affect the carrying capacity of a habitat for a particular species,
but the species'
response has not been quantified or measured or where there
is
insufficient
information to
indicate a cause-effect relationship, authors
tend to eliminate the factors as potential model variables.
Several types of measurable responses to changes in habitat variables are
usually reported in the literature.
For example, changes in spatial distribu-
tion of a species may be associated with changes in one variable while dif-
ferences
in
species
survival
may be associated with
changes
in a different
variable.
The measurable response by individuals or populations to changes in
each
model
variable,
as
reported
in
the
1iterature,
must be converted to a
suitability index for the variable.
The way that this conversion is made is
determined by the author and may vary between models.
Assumptions about the
reported relationship between the species response and the suitabil ity
index
of a variable are critical
in model interpretation and are presented with HSI
models.
Data on species with presumably similar habitat requirements that occur
in the same habitat as the species for which the model is being developed can
be used to develop suitability index graphs.
This usually occurs when data on
the selected species are unavailable.
Assumed similarities in habitat require-
ments between the similar species and the selected species mayor may not have
been proven.
Cause and effect relationships
between
impacts and changes
in
habitat
variables often
are
unclear.
Species
responses
often
are
correlated
with
changes
in
several
environmental
variables,
which may be highly correlated
with each other.
The model builder must decide which, if any, of the correlat-
ed
environmental
variables
should
be
included
in
the model.
However,
the
decision often must be based on experience and intuition.
Variables might be
selected on basis of ease of measurement or
how much variability within the
relationship is accounted for by the variable.
A.8


Changes in
a habitat
variable
included
in
the
model
are
expected
to
result in measurable and predictable species responses under controlled condi-
tions.
For example, fish kept at different,
but constant,
temperatures
may
exhibit different growth rates.
Applying
this
type of experimental
data to
natural
conditions is
less certain
because
temperature
cannot
be held con-
stant.
Instructions
for
when,
where,
and
how to
measure
the variable are
required.
Assumptions about
how model
variables cumulatively affect habitat suit-
ability
must
be
made
and converted
into mathematical
language
in
order to
aggregate
the
individual
variable
suitability
indices
into
an
HSI.
Model
variables can be assigned different weights.
Weighting factors usually reflect
perceived importance, rather than the results of rigorous experiments.
Weight-
ing is determined,
to a large extent, by the personal experience of the model
builder and the advice of species experts contacted during the model
building
process.
Qualitative
statements,
such as
"Compl et e utilization of available
food resources requires that adequate
resting
cover be located nearby"
are
converted into mathematical expressions.
Conversion to mathematical form does
not decrease the
subjectivity,
but it does
allow different
model
users
to
arrive at the same HSI if they start with the same set of habitat measurements.
If the
HSI
produced
by the
model
does
not
seem reasonable,
but the
verbal
assumptions
on variable
interactions
do,
the
mathematical
statement of
the
assumptions can be changed until the revised equations give a more believable
HSI, while remaining consistent with the assumptions.
For example, many model
builders use a geometric mean to express
how a variable value with
low suit-
ability can be compensated for by one or more variable values with high suit-
ability.
If this method allows for too much compensation,
the
value of
the
exponent on the geometric mean can be increased, which will
lower the answer
for the variable combination.
The major
limitation
of
mechanistic
HSI
models,
based
on suitability
index graphs, is that the accuracy of their output cannot be directly verified.
Since real values of
HSI do not exist and cannot be measured, model
accuracy
has been tested by comparing model outputs (i .e., HSI) with measureable indices
of carrying capacity, such as fish standing crop or production.
Model accuracy
in predicting measureable indices of carrying capacity depends on the accuracy
of the data base, the various assumptions used to construct the model, and the
relationship of
the measureable
index
to carrying capacity.
The data bases
used to construct mechanistic HSI models are quite variable,
both
in quantity
and quality.
HSI models for intensively studied fishes usually contain more
variables and supporting data than other models.
Preliminary tests of mechan-
istic HSI models by the Georgia, Maine, Oklahoma, Oregon, and Utah Cooperative
Fishery
Research
Units
have
indicated
that
the
accuracy
of
the
model s
in
predicting
standing
crop
of
individual
fish
species is often low.
However,
most of the testing was done at a few sites in restricted geographical regions
and,
usually, at one point in time.
These tests indicated that, for a given
data
set,
model
performance
can
sometimes
be improved by reformulating
the
mathematical
descriptions of
how suitability indices of individual
variables
are
combi ned to
determi ne overa 11
habitat suitabi 1i ty.
The low predi cti ve
accuracy of present mechanistic HSI models may be considered a major weakness
that
limits their utility as
a planning tool.
This
justifiable
criticism,
however, does not take into account the diffprence in the accuracy requirements
A.9


between science and planning activities
(see discussion
by Romesburg
1981).
Science
requires
strict,
often
statistical,
measures
of
accuracy
whereas
planners often must judge model
accuracy
in
terms of
the goals set by the
planning program,
because the level
of knowledge is insufficient to do other-
wise
(OIConnor and Patten
1967;
Romesburg
1981).
The urgency
of
planning
often
necessitates the
use of
information that
may
not
be highly accurate.
Mechanistic HSI models provide a means of
displaying
logical,
but scientif-
ically
untested,
cause
and
effect
relationships
between
variables.
Watt
(1962) classified this type of mode l
v as an a priori model, constructed
on
a
priori assumptions about causal relationships, where precise and accurate data
are incomplete.
Mechanistic HSI models, like many planning tools and a priori
mod~ls in general, have predictive powers only within accuracy levels that are
relative to the goals of the planning program (Romesburg 1981).
These models
cannot be "proven" right or wrong, but the reliability of the model output can
be tested by reformulating the assumptions and examining the new model behavior
relative to
how well it meets the acceptable and ideal
model objectives for
the planning program (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1981:Chapter 3.1).
The validation process for mechanistic HSI models evaluates model
output
at four different acceptance levels:
(1) review by model author; (2) analysis
of model behavior with sample data sets that mimic various habitat scenarios;
(3) review by species authorities; and (4) testing the model with actual field
data (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1981).
Results of tests of model accuracy
and precision, when available, are included with each HSI model in this series.
All mechanistic HSI models currently have been validated to level 3,
although
review by an authority does not necessarily mean the authority agrees with all
model
assumptions or that
the
model
can
predict
any measureable
index
of
carrying capacity,
such as standing crop.
Continued sensitivity analyses and
field tests are underway to improve model accuracy and precision and to evalU-
ate
various
approaches
to
model
development.
The results of these analyses
will serve as a quality check on the model and may make it possible to further
refine the model so that it will meet a higher acceptance level.
It should be possible to determine or improve the accuracy of the models
with well-designed tests.
For any set of
species'
responses that the model
can be tested against,
such as standing crop of fish,
an index with a higher
correlation with the
response
than
the
given
HSI
can
almost
certainly
be
developed by statistical
analysis.
This
index
may have greater accuracy in
predicting values
from the original
data set but mayor
may
not
have more
accuracy
in
predicting values
for data sets collected
in different
regions
under different conditions.
This is especially true when the range of values
for
a variable
is
greater
in
the
new data set.
In addition,
the
species
response that is measured for the original data set may not be the appropriate
measure of carrying capacity in alternative model applications.
Summary.
The
three types of
models have different strengths and weak-
nesses.
Regression
model s may
provide
high
predictive accuracy for
a data
set, but the user must apply sound judgment to determine if the same accuracy
can be obtained when the model is used to make predictions for a new data set.
The simple descriptive models have low demands for information and quantify
subjective
decisions
about
optimal
levels
of
habitat-related
variables.
A.10


However, model resolution is limited to a few discrete HSI ratings (e.g., 0.3,
0.7, 1.0), and the oversimplified format tends to camouflage the assumptions on
ecological processess used to determine the ratings.
Mechanistic models provide a way to display and integrate a wide variety
of assumed cause and effect relationships between variables when determining
habitat suitability.
The accuracy of this type of model may be low or unknown,
but the reliability may be sufficient to
use
the
model
as
a planning tool.
When this type of model is used to make predictions, the reasons for successful
and unsuccessful
predictions may be difficult to determine because it may be
difficult to isolate the influence of individual assumptions.
Levins
(1966) stated that mathematical
models used in population biology
have three major characteristics: precision; generality; and realism.
Further-
more,
models
tend to
be weak
in
one of
these characteristics.
Because
no
model is perfect, clear objectives are necessary in order to determine which
model
weaknesses are acceptable for
the planning task and,
therefore, which
type
of
model
to
use.
Specific
strategies
for
model
development
to
meet
planning objectives are discussed by Farmer et al. (in press).
Model Modifications
One potential
problem in application of any of the three model types is
the difficulty in measuring all
the habitat variables in the model(s).
This
problem usually can be overcome by modifying the measurement technique suggest-
ed for the variable and estimating the variable value using the data obtained
with the modified technique.
This alteration is especially useful with vari-
ables that require long term monitoring or
some form of
spatial
or
temporal
averaging
for
accurate
measurement.
For
example,
accurate
estimation
of
"maximum monthly average turbidity during the summer" in the channel catfish
model
(McMahon and Terrell
1982) requires monitoring of turbidity during the
summer months.
Such monitoring could be expensive and would apply only to the
period sampled.
The references cited in the model indicate that turbidity may
affect channel catfish standing crop.
However,
none of the data are directly
related to turbidity, as defined in the model.
The need to accurately estimate
the level of the turbidity variable is not established in the model documenta-
tion,
and the accuracy level of the original
model is unknown.
If the model
user feels that one or a few turbidity measurements will provide a sufficiently
accurate estimate of the variable value to meet model application goals, the
simpler estimation technique should be used.
In some cases,
values for model
variables can be estimated from measurements on similar water bodies, rather
than measured on site.
It may be possible to modify and improve regression models by stratifying
heterogeneous data sets into more homogenous subsets.
For example, Leidy and
Jenkins
(1977)
and Jenkins
(1982)
found that regression
models explained a
greater part of the variability in standing crops of fishes in reservo1rs when
the reservoirs were grouped by storage ratio and chemical
types than when the
reservoirs
were
analyzed
together.
Subdivision
of
the
original
data
set
should be directed at producing a subset of observations that are as closely
related as possible to the conditions at the proposed model application site.
A.ll


The statistical analysis is run on the new data subset and the new regression
model used in place of the original model.
Descriptive models, based on the assumption that the presence or absence
of optimal ranges of a few variables is sufficient to describe habitat suit-
ability, do not have a complex causal structure.
They do not provide specific
hypotheses
about
how
vari ab1es
cumul atively
determi ne habitat
sui tabil ity.
These models are easily modified so that they match values of indicators of
habitat suitability, such as hatching success or production, observed in areas
similar to the model application site.
Descriptive models can be modified by
group experience using the "Delphi" technique described by Zuboy (1981).
Mechanistic HSI models that derive suitability index ratings for individ-
ual habitat variables and use an equation to combine these ratings also can be
modified.
Including more variables in a model does not necessarily result in
a model with greater predictive power and may, in fact, cause the model to be
less reliable than a simpler model (Holling 1978).
In fact, there is a higher
probability of making an incorrect assumption about variable interactions when
the number of variables is large.
In addition,
a great expenditure of
time
and effort may be needed to measure a large number of variables.
Three methods
to reduce model complexity for site specific applications are discussed below.
One method to simplify a mechanistic HSI model is to define an evaluation
species
in
such a manner that only the model
component that appears to have
the greatest influence on habitat suitability is
used.
The combination
of
life
stage (e.g.,
fry and juvenile) or life requisite (e.g.,
food and water
quality)
components into an overall
rating
of
habitat suitability is
based
primarily on the experience and intuition
of
the authors,
not
experimental
data.
These models are useful
for exploring relationships
between variables
related to life stage habitat quality, but may not be useful for meeting some
p1anni ng needs.
Use of a si ngle component for the
total
speci es
HSI
avoi ds
the
problem of making erroneous quantitative assumptions about the relation-
ship between model components and requires only a decision about which compo-
nent is most important for determining the suitability of the conditions being
analyzed.
The selected component may be the
one that will
be affected the
most by the land use alternatives or the one that is assumed to have the most
influence on population levels.
A second method
to
reduce model
complexity is to
limit the
number
of
variables used while maintaining the model structure.
This method can be used
when
the acceptable verification
level
is
low; e.g.,
the
model
appears
to
provide reasonable output to the authors or selected individuals familiar with
the species but has not been verified with actual
field data.
The first step
is
to
diagram the model structure to
show how the variables are combined to
determine
overall
habitat
suitability
(Fig. A-3).
Selected
variables
are
deleted
and
the
remaining
variables
reexamined.
The original
relationship
between habitat variables, model components,
and the HSI
is retained
in
the
new model.
For example, a potential user of the model described in Figure A-3
may have data on three variables:
turbidity;
percent
pools;
and
substrate
type.
These data are sufficient to develop a very abbreviated rating for the
four life requisite components identified in the original model.
Although the
model has been
simplified,
much of
the reasoning behind
the original model
A.12


Habitat Variables
Life Requisites
Length of agricultural
growing season (V6 ) -----/
-
Dissolved oxygen (Va)
-
----
Salinity (adult) (V 9 ) -
-
Dissolved oxygen ~(~V~a)~=======:::=:;;~,waterquality (CWQ) -----iHSI
Substrate type (V4 )
Turbidity (V 7 )
Salinity (fry, juvenile)
Temperature (juvenile)
Temperature (adult) (Vs )
Temperature (fry) (V 1 2 )
Temperature (embryo) (V lO )
--
---
Salinity (embryo) (Vll ) "'- -
Figure
A-3.
Example
diagram
of
model
structure
showing
how
model
variables
combine
to
determine
an
HSI.
Dashed
lines
indicate
optional variables.
A.13


structure still
app 1i es,
reduci ng the
amount of documentation
needed for the
new model.
This approach also can be
used to
include additional
variables as
new habitat
requirement
information
is
obtained
or
to
add
variables
that
affect habitat suitability at a particular site but which were not contained
in the original model.
Variables
with
the
weakest
relationships
to
habitat
suitability
are
likely candidates for deletion from the model
for site specific applications.
For example, a habitat variable with a strong relationship to species survival,
such as dissolved oxygen or pH, would be retained in the model if the proposed
application
site
had
levels
known to negatively affect species survival.
If
the levels did not affect species survival, the variable could be dropped from
the model.
A variable that is in the model
because fish seem to prefer certain
levels
of
the
variable,
even
though
the
consequences
of
a
variable
being
outside the prefered range is uncertain, would be another likely candidate for
elimination.
Variables
that
will
not
have
different
suitabilities
in
the
range of conditions being compared also may be deleted.
Statistical models can be used as screening tools to reduce the number of
model variables.
If a suitable indicator of carrying capacity (e.g.,
standing
crop,
production,
or angler harvest)
is available for water bodies similar to
those being evaluated, it may be possible to develop a statistical
model
that
predicts the indicator of carrying capacity based on the environmental
vari-
ables
included in the original
mechanistic model.
Only those variables
that
are statistically important in determining carrying capacity would be included
in the final
HSI model.
The original
model
structure is retained.
With this
approach,
the statistical
model
is used to identify the most important vari-
ables to include
in
a mechanistic
HSI model,
rather than to make predictions
of the selected measure of carrying capacity at the model application site.
The
third
method
of
reducing
model
complexity
to
meet
specific
study
objectives is to develop a statistically calibrated HSI.
The variables
that
will
have
their
suitability
changed
as
a
result
of
a
specific
impact
are
aggregated
into
an
index,
using
the
original
model
structure.
Sites
are
located
that
represent
a
wide
range
of variable
values,
and
a
statistical
model
that predicts
a
measurable
response,
such
as
standing
crop,
from
the
index is determined.
The HSI is the value of the measurable response predicted
with
the
original
index
divided
by
a
maximum
value
for
the
response.
If
possible,
the
statistical
model
should
be developed using data
from similar
water
bodies
in
the
geographical
area
where
the
model
is
to
be
used.
An
example of using a calibrated habitat index to quantify relative capacity of a
stream to support fish
is
presented
by
Newcombe
(1981).
Once
an
index
has
been shown to be a reliable predictor of a measurable response,
such as stand-
ing crop or production,
the predicted
measurable
response
would
normally
be
changed back to
an
HSI only if it was necessary to use HEP to compare impacts
with species for which similar reliable models did not exist.
A.14


DETERMINING THE HSI FOR AVAILABLE HABITAT
Once
an HSI
mode 1 that
meets
study
objectives
has
been
deve loped
or
selected, model variables must be estimated from field measurements or histor-
i ca1 data.
Sources of i nformat i on about measurement techn i ques
for
physi ca 1
and chemical
variables (e.g., dissolved oxygen,
turbidity, and conductivity)
are summarized by States et al. (1978) and Lind (1979).
Methods for evaluating
and minimizing
sampling variability are described in U.S.
Fish and Wildlife
Service (1980: Appendix B).
Potential data sources for selected variables and
suggestions
for
recording
and
analyzing
aquatic
data
are
provided
below.
Proper recording and documentation of model input data are especially important
if model accuracy is to be evaluated.
Sample sites are chosen to represent larger areas of similar habitat.
If
HEP will
be used
to
characterize future
conditions,
the
similarity
of
the
future condition of the sample site to the future condition of the larger area
that the sample site represents must be considered.
Factors to consider
in
selecting the location and number of sample sites include the variability of
the area being sampled, the required accuracy of the application, and time and
cost constraints.
Selecting Riverine Sample Sites
Selection
of
sample
sites
in
riverine
habitats
can follow one of
two
major strategies or a combination of the two:
(1) selection of
one or
more
reaches with habitat conditions that are representative of a particular section
of the study area; or (2) selection of one or more reaches with habitat condi-
tions that are unique and critical to the survival of a fish population within
the study area.
As a general rule, a representative reach should be 10 to 14 times longer
than
the
average
channel width in order to
include two sequences of channel
features
(Bovee
and
Mi 1hous
1978).
Once
a
representative
reach
has
been
identified, most habitat variables can be measured along transects.
Transect
measurements are used in several
stream eva1uat i on methods (e. g.,
Herri ngton
and Dunham 1967; Duff and Cooper 1976; Bovee and Milhous 1978).
The number of
transects needed within a representative reach is dependent on the degree of
variation in the model variables and the level of reliability required for the
study.
At
1east
10 evenly
spaced
transects
per
representative
reach
are
recommended
for
use
in
samp1i ng
habi tat
vari abi 1i ty .
Data
from these
10
transects can be used to determine if a greater or lesser number of transects
are needed to adequately sample the model variables necessary to calculate an
HSI.
Selection of a critical
stream
reach
is
dependent
on
knowledge of
a
species·
habitat
requirements.
The critical
reach
should
contain
unique
features that are limiting to a particular life stage or the species in general
(Bovee and Milhous 1978).
For example,
knowledge that spawning habitat is in
short supply and limited to one area would lead to the identification of that
area
as
a critical
reach.
Spacing
of
transects
within
representative
or
cri t i ca1 reaches
can be determi ned by the
formul a 0 = L/( n - 1)
where
D =
di stance
between
each
transect,
L =
length
of
reach,
and
n =
number
of
transects.
A.15


Selecting Lacustrine Sample Sites
Selection of sample sites in lacustrine habitats is based on considera-
tions
similar to
those
used
in
the selection
of
representative or critical
reaches in riverine habitats.
Transects provide a convenient method to
sample
variables
that
change
horizontally,
such as
vegetative
cover and substrate
composition.
However,
many lacustrine habitat
variables
change
vertically,
such as water temperature and dissolved oxygen, and vertical profiles may also
be necessary.
Transects can be established perpendicular to
a center
line
through the long axis of the lake and marked with bouys.
Transect spacing is
determined by the formula used in riverine sampling, with L equal
to the long
axis.
Recording Field Data
Previously developed data
sheets
may be adequate for recording habitat
data for the models
selected.
However, it
may be necessary to
develop
new
data collection procedures and recording forms if a model application requires
data not usually collected by the user.
Figures A-4 and A-5, at the back of
this document,
illustrate an example riverine data record and lacustrine data
record,
respectively,
for quantitative habitat measurements
and qualitative
observations.
These data records and instructions for completion incorporate
some of the techniques of the transect-based methodologies of Herrington and
Dunham (1967), Dunham and Collotzi (1975), and Bovee (1978) and were developed
primarily from our experience in the development and application of HSI models
for channel catfish, creek chub, and cutthroat trout.
The stream data record
is oriented towards data collection
in
wadeable
streams where the water is
clear
enough
to
see
the
bottom.
The data
records display more data
than
necessary for many site specific applications.
Each record contains a complete
location description
to
accommodate data acquisition by more than one field
crew.
These records are a starting point for development of project specific
field forms.
Specific variable measurement techniques and example field forms
for use with the trout habitat model described by Binns and Eiserman
(1979)
are provided by Binns (1982).
Variable Estimation for Existing Conditions
Common HSI model variables used in this series can be divided into cate-
gories
including morphometric,
hydrologic,
cover,
water
quality,
and other
variables.
Techniques that can be used to determine values of model variables
from the data records (Figs. A-4 and A-5) are provided.
When variables cannot
be measured at the time and place specified in a model, it may be possible to
estimate their value from measurements made at other sites or
times
or
from
measurements
taken
on similar
water
bodies.
The procedure
used to obtain
variable values should be documented.
Measurement techniques that are describ-
ed with the data records are not repeated here.
Morphometric and hydrologic variables.
Values for most of the variables
listed below can be estimated
from data
routinely collected by State water
resource
or
conservation agencies, reservoir operating agencies, or the U.S.
Geological Survey.
A.16


Average annual
base flow -
Average 30 day low flow
Average annual daily flow
x
100
Average discharge - average volume of water passing a specified point during a
specified time period.
Average annual discharge estimates can be obtained
from U.S. Geological Survey gauging station records.
Accurate measurement
of
discharge
at
a
particular
time
on ungauged
stream
sites
requires
precise data on stream cross
section area and water velocities.
Tech-
niques
and
equipment
necessary
to
measure
discharge
are described
in
Bovee and Milhous (1978).
Average maximum stream depth - arithmetic mean of the maximum depths from each
transect (page 2, riverine data record).
Average stream width - arithmetic mean of the stream widths at each transect
site,
measured
at
a
specified
time
and
flow
(page 3,
riverine
data
record).
Average velocity -
arithmetic
mean
of all
velocity measurements
taken at a
depth 0.6 of the way from surface to bottom, ina specifi ed area, at a
specified flow and time of year (page 2, riverine data record).
Velocity
can
be estimated by timing
the
flow
of
marking
dye
in
a
stream,
as
described
in Binns and Eiserman (1979).
Velocities in the water column
follow a known distribution; Bovee and Milhous (1978) provide a graph for
estimating velocity at one depth from a measurement taken at a different
depth.
Maximum depth - from page 1, lacustrine data record.
Mean depth - from page 1, lacustrine data record.
Reservoir drawdowns
-
the
change
in
reservoir elevation
during
a specified
time
interval.
Data on drawdowns are usually available from the agency
that operates the reservoir.
Reservoir flushing rate - page 1, lacustrine data record.
Shoreline development factor - page 1, lacustrine data record.
Storage ratio - page 1, lacustrine data record.
Stream gradient - page 1, riverine data record.
Surface area - page 1, lacustrine data record.
Water level fluctuations - page 1, lacustrine data record.
A.17


Cover variables.
Methods
for
estimating these variables
from transect
information entered on the data record are described below.
Ocular estimates,
based on a visual inspection of the sample site,
may be substituted for tran-
sect data.
This method will
speed
up the field
sampling
but will
be less
precise.
Techniques
used to
determine values
of
variables
should
be docu-
mented.
Average
percent
of
streambank
covered
by rooted
vegetation
-
subtract the
percent
bare
ground
recorded
for
each
bank from
100% (riverine
data
record, page 1) and calculate the arithmetic'mean of the remainders.
Average pool class rating - multiply the length of the transect segment cross-
ing the pool by the
rating
for
each
pool
section
rated (riverine data
record, page 1).
Divide the sum of the products by the sum of the segment
lengths to obtain the average rating.
Average size of substrate - weighted (by length of transect segment) arithmetic
mean
of
substrate
size(s)
recorded
on transect (riverine data
record,
page 2).
If average
substrate
size will
be used to
evaluate
salmonid
spawning habitat,
the
Fredle
number
(Lotspeich
and
Everest 1981)
may
provide a better
index
of
substrate
suitability
than
average
size
of
substrate.
Maximum
percent
of
bottom
covered
by
subsurface
ice
-
maximum percent of
bottom covered by ice at the end of a winter of average severity.
This
variable is not identified on the data records.
It could be entered in
the
blank
co1umn
under
substrate
(ri veri ne data
record,
page 2)
and
recorded along transects at the time the maximum coverage occurs.
Percent
backwater areas -
calculate by dividing
the
sum of
the
lengths
of
transect segments where backwaters occur by the sum of the lengths of all
transects and multiplying the quotient by 100.
One of the blank columns
on page 2 of the riverine data record can be used to record the occurrence
of
backwater
areas.
Percent
overflow
areas
located
off
of
the
ma in
channel can be calculated in a similar manner.
Percent cover - divide the sum of the lengths of all transect segments cross-
ing the specified cover class by the sum of the lengths of all transects
and multiply by 100 (riverine data record, page 1; lacustrine data record,
page 2).
Measurements should be taken at the specified time and flow for
maximum
accuracy.
If
location
of
cover
(e.g.,
pools)
is
specified,
include only measurements taken in specified locations.
Percent fine
sediments (or percent fines) - the percent,
by volume, of sub-
strate composed of particles less than a specified size.
If no size is
specified,
calculate the
percent based
on particles with a diameter of
less than 2 mm.
Diameter is measured along the long axis of the particle.
A sieve
with
openings
of
the
specified
size
is
an effective
way to
separate the sediment.
Samples should be taken to a depth of approximate-
ly
30 cm with a core sampler or bucket.
Multiply the percent fines by
the length of the transect segment for which the sample applies.
Divide
the
product
sum
by the
sum
of
all
transect
lengths.
Values
can
be
A.18


recorded
in the
blank column (page 2,
riverine data
record).
Lotspeich
and Everest (1981) describe difficulties with the use of percent fines in
evaluating
quality
of
salmonid
spawning
substrate
and define
an
index
(Fredle
numbers)
for
evaluating
spawning
gravel
that
considers
both
average size (geometric mean) and size distribution of sediment particles.
Percent inundated vegetation -
calculate the
length of each transect
segment
where
inundated
vegetat i on
occurs,
and
d i vi de
the
sum of
the
segment
lengths by the sum of all transect
length~ (riverine data record,
page 1;
lacustrine data record, page 2).
Per~ent littoral area - percent of the water body or study area that is shallow
enough to be
inhabited by rooted aquatic plants.
Plants do
not
have to
be
present.
Values for this variable can
be
approximated
by estimating
the maximum depth that could be
inhabited by
rooted
aquatic
plants
and
determi ni ng
the
percent
of
the
water
body
1ess
than
or
equa 1 to
that
depth.
Areas
with
substrates
i ncapab1e
of
supporting
rooted
aquatic
plants would be excluded from the calculations.
Percent
pools
-
di vi de
the
sum of
1engths
of transect
segments where pools
occur (ri veri ne data record,
page 3)
by
the
sum of
the
1engths
of all
transects and multiply by 100.
Measurements should be taken at a speci-
fied time and flow.
Percent of stream
area
shaded
-
arithmetic
mean
of
percent
shade
estimates
(riverine data record, page 1).
Percent
substrate
-
sum the 1engths of a 11
transect segments that cross the
specified substrate type,
divide by the
sum of the lengths of all
tran-
sects, and multiply by 100 (page 2, riverine and lacustrine data records).
Percent
substrate
embeddedness
-
muIti ply
the
percent
embeddedness recorded
for each transect segment
by the
segment 1ength,
sum the
products,
and
divide by the sum of all
segment lengths (page 2,
riverine and lacustrine
data records).
Predominant substrate type - substrate type that is most common along transects
(riverine data record, page 2).
Vegetation
index - calculate the arithmetic mean of the percentages recorded
for each type of ri pa ri an vegetation (trees,
shrubs,
grasses,
and forbs)
and
bare
ground
for
all
transects.
Use
these
means
to
calculate
the
index as described in the model.
Data are recorded on the riverine data
record, page 1.
Water quality variables.
Water
quality
variables
are
included
in
the
species models in a variety of forms,
such as weekly average, monthly average,
maximum, minimum,
and range.
The appropriate value for the variable should be
determined for the specified time and part of the water body.
Values can
be
ca 1cul ated
from
the
transect
and
profi 1e
data
on
the
data
records
or
from
monitoring data.
Most of the models do not consider toxic substance concentra-
tions
in
conjunction with water quality variables.
Brigham
and
Hey (1981)
A.19


describe a stress function for rating water quality that includes 20 variables
and considers the interaction of dissolved oxygen,
pH,
and toxic substances,
such as ammonia, cadmium, and lead.
Alkalinity, dissolved oxygen,
pH,
and salinity -
measurement techniques are
referenced in the instructions for the riverine data record, page 2, and
the
lacustrine
data
record,
page
3.
If
the
water
quality
variable
normally fluctuates over a time scale shorter than the interval specified
by the model, use the measurement that results in the lowest suitability
index.
Temperature - measure temperature and oxygen concurrently at time and locations
specified in the models.
Total dissolved solids (TDS) -
measurement techniques are
referenced
in
the
instructions for the riverine data record, page 2, and the lacustrine data
record, page 3.
Transparency - usually expressed as the greatest depth at which a Secchi
disk
(Lind 1979) is visible to an observer from just above the water surface.
Readings should be taken around midday.
Turbidity - measurement techniques are referenced in the instructions for the
riverine data record, page 2, and the lacustrine data record, page 3.
Other variables.
Length of
agri cultura1 growi ng
season -
average
number of
days between the
fi na1 kill i ng frost of spri ng and the fi rst kill i ng frost of fa 11.
This
i nformati on can be obtained from Nati ona1 Oceanographi c and Atmospheri c
Administration publications (1974, 1978) or from a local weather station.
Average daily invertebrate drift rate - the average daily number of inverte-
brates contained in a unit volume of stream discharge.
PREDICTING FUTURE HSI'S
Determining
habitat
suitabil ity
indices
for future years requires the
estimation
of
future
habitat conditions.
There
are
a variety
of
possible
methods for forecasting aquatic habitat variables, ranging from very simple to
very complex.
Not all
forecasting problems call for the use of mathematical
models.
In some cases, it may be appropriate to formulate a consensus projec-
t i on of future condi t ions through use of the Delphi
process, as descri bed by
Zuboy (1981).
The
user must determine the
level
of detail
necessary for a
particular project.
There are
no definitive techniques.
Many of the predic-
tive
models cited below are applicable only
under certain conditions.
The
user should understand the underlying assumptions before attempting to apply
any of the models.
Comprehensive
water
quality
simulation
models have been developed for
riverine, lacustrine, and estuarine environments.
Water temperature, dissolved
A.20


oxygen
concentration,
and
the
concentration
of
various
conservative (e.g.,
total
dissolved solids)
and nonconservative (e.g.,
plant
nutrients)
constit-
uents
are
among the
variables that can
be predicted.
Simulation models are
generally most helpful
in cases where a large
number of alternatives will
be
considered, because the cost of acquiring, calibrating, and verifying a simula-
tion model is usually very great in comparison to the cost of actually applying
it (Grimsrud et al.
1976).
Data acquisition
and input to computers also are
burdensome
in
some
cases.
Grimsrud
et
al.
(1976)
provided
a
very
useful
review
and
evaluation
of
water
quality
models
ava i l ab l e
as
of
1975.
Their
review included simplified models that
can
be
applied without
the
aid
of
a
computer.
Model
evaluation
criteria
included
applicability,
data
require-
ments , initiation
and
utilization
costs,
accuracy,
and
ease
of
application.
The
reader
is
referred
to
this
document
for
a
more
detailed discussion
of
these models.
More recently developed
models
are
the
Stream
Simulation
and
Assessment
Model:
Version IV
(SSAM IV)
(Grenney
and
Kraszewski
1981)
and
a
model
for river-reservoir systems (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1978).
A more
advanced version of the reservoir component of the latter model
also is avail-
able
(Environmental
Laboratory
1982).
Many water quality
simulation
models
are compartmentalized into submodels which can be applied independently.
This
flexibility greatly increases their utility.
Additional
methods
and
sources
of
information
for
predicting
aquatic
habitat variables are presented below.
Temperature
In
most
regions,
weather
and,
as
a
consequence,
water
temperature
are
highly variable between years.
This makes it difficult to define the "norma l "
or
"typ t ca l "
temperature
cycle
unless
long
term water
temperature
data
are
available.
Temperatures of selected surface waters (mostly rivers and streams)
have
been
monitored
for
periods
ranging
from
several
to
many years (Blakey
1966;
Pauszek
1972).
Compi1at ions
of
temperature
data
are
avail ab 1e
for
surface waters
in
Alabama
(Avrett
and Carroon 1964),
Illinois (Harmeson and
Schnepper
1965),
Mississippi
(Golden
1959),
Montana
(Aagaard
1969),
North
Carolina
(Woodward
1970),
Pennsylvania
(Mangan
1946),
Texas
(Rawson
1970),
Utah
(Whitaker
1971),
and
Wyoming
(Lowham
et al.
1975).
Such
historical
records
may no
longer
be
appl icable if subsequent
human activity has caused
substantial
changes
in the drainage
basin.
Possible
human actions
that
can
affect water temperatures include thermal loading,
impoundment, altered flows,
deforestation, and changes in runoff patterns.
Long term climatic data are available for most localities in the United
States.
These data,
combined with
information
on flows, basin configuration,
nearshore topography, and vegetation, can be
used to characterize the average
or expected thermal
regimes for lakes and rivers.
Some general guidelines and
a number of potentially useful references are cited below.
Seasonal
changes in air and water
temperature
typically
follow
a
sinu-
soidal
curve.
(This pattern is interrupted during winter in lakes and rivers
that ice over).
Water temperatures generally mimic air temperatures, but with
a delay.
This phase shift and the relative amplitudes of air and water ten."
perature curves depend on morphometric and hydrologic characteristics of
the
A.21


water body concerned and on the degree of shading and wind-mixing.
Air tem-
perature
records
can be used to
predi ct water temperatures
in
the
surface
(epilimnial) layer of lakes and reservoirs (Sette 1940; McCombie 1959) and in
rivers (Kothandaraman 1972), provided that the air-water temperature relation-
ship can be calibrated with data from a nearby water body that is similar to
the one for which predictions are to be made.
Different investigators have developed different calibration procedures.
Sette (1940) determined the relationship between the rate of change of water
temperature and the difference between air and water temperature for an exist-
ing reservoir and then used this relationship, together with local air tempera-
ture data, to predi ct surface water temperatures ina
proposed reservoi r of
similar dimensions and in the same area.
McCombie (1959) calculated regres-
sion equations relating mean monthly surface water temperatures to mean monthly
air temperature
for
several
northern
lakes,
using
measurements
made over a
series of years.
Separate regression analyses were performed for each
month
because
the
re 1ati onshi p between average water temperature and average air
temperature
was different
for
wa rmi ng
and
coo1i ng
phases.
The
resultant
equations
can be used to estimate water temperatures
in
any past year for
which air temperatures are available or for an "aver-aqe" or hypothetical air
temperature regime.
Kothandaraman (1972) presented a relatively simple mathe-
matical
model
for predicting
seasonal
change
in water temperature
from air
temperatures.
The model
is based
on the
sinusoidal
trend
in
both air and
water temperatures and on the correlation between nonseasonal
(random) varia-
tions in the air and water temperatures.
The model performed well when para-
meterized for one site on a river and applied to another site 44 miles down-
stream.
The relationship between air and water temperature for streams depends on
the degree of shading, ground water inflows, and channel configuration (Blakey
1966).
In Oregon,
exposed
streams typi ca11y have month ly mean temperatures
that exceed monthly mean air temperatures during
summer,
unless they derive
much of their flow from cold springs; more sheltered streams, and those that
are largely spring-fed, remain cooler than the air (Moore 1964).
Moore (1964)
also noted that streams with an east-west orientation tend to be warmer than
north-south flowing streams in the same area.
The warming effect of deforesta-
tion has been documented for streams throughout the United States (Brown and
Krygier 1970).
Laythe (1958) listed extensive data on air and water temperatures for the
Snake River.
These data have not been analyzed but could be used to establish
the relationship between air and water
temperature
for
a
moderately
large
ri ver.
Ai r
and water temperatures were compi 1ed for ri vers and streams in
Pennsylvania (Mangan 1946) and Utah (Whitaker 1971).
Still
simpler methods are available.
For example,
if the
surface does
not
become covered with
ice,
an annual
temperature curve can be defi ned by
specifying maximal and minimal water temperatures and the dates on which these
extremes are reached and then dri vi ng a si ne curve through these poi nts.
If
the surface does ice over, the maximum temperature, date of maximum tempera-
ture,
and
approximate
length
of
the
ice-free
season
must
be known.
Ward
(1963) described a least squares approach for fitting a sine curve to stream
A.22


temperature data.
Kothandaraman
and Evans (1970)
used the same approach to
represent annual temperature variations at different depths in a reservoir.
A
first order sine curve accounted for more than 95% of the annual variation in
water temperature
in each
case.
If
greater
precision
is
required,
higher
order
harmonics
can be used (Kothandaraman
1972;
Straskraba and Javorni cky
1973); however, this is rarely helpful
for characterizing a "typical" thermal
regime.
Mechanistic
temperature
models
also
can
be
used
to
predict
thermal
regimes.
These methods make a more thorough and explicit accounting of heat
exchange
processes
than
do
the
empirical/statistical
techniques
described
aboye.
Data requirements are, accordingly,
somewhat greater.
The approaches
outlined by Burt (1957),
Raphael (1962), Delay and Seaders (1966), and Brown
(1969) are patterned after the energy budget work of Anderson (1954).
Burt
(1958)
described methods for evaluating terms of a heat budget equation and
presented solutions for
two Snake River reservoirs.
Precise,
site specific
measurements are required in order to accurately predict daily temperatures in
small streams, especially if they are unshaded (Brown 1969).
Diurnal
tempera-
ture variations in small streams may exceed 14° C (Blakey 1966).
Prediction
of
temperatures
in
aquatic habitats that are
not thermally
uniform is especially difficult.
Shallow zones
warm and cool
more
rapidly
than deepwater habitats,
but the temperature patterns which develop are often
transitory.
Most predictive models are one dimensional
and assume isothermal
water at a given depth.
This assumption may be violated in impoundments with
high flow/ volume ratios (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1980).
A wide array of
stratification
patterns
may
develop
in
reservoirs,
depending
on inlet and
outlet locations, flows
and densities, and the reservoir operating
schedule.
Wunderlich and Elder (1967) discussed these factors and noted that it is rare
for a given stratification pattern to recur in successive years.
For complex
reservoirs, it may not
be possible
to
precisely characterize an average or
"normal" condition.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1980) and the Tennessee Valley Authority
(1976) have developed and tested computer
(FORTRAN IV) models for predicting
temperatures in stratified lakes and reservoirs.
Both models have been tested,
and both were judged to perform well.
Program listings and instructions are
available.
Data
requirements
are
considerable,
but
most
of
the
necessary
information
is readily available.
The
TVA model
is a modification
of that
proposed by Ryan and Harleman (1971).
The procedure developed by Burt (1957) for forecasting temperatures in a
Snake River reservoir is mathematically less complex than those used by the
Corps and TVA, but it, too,
is based on an explicit accounting of heat flow.
Surface heat exchange is estimated using meteorologic data, and the movement
of water and heat
thro~gh different strata in the reservoir is simulated.
Phosphorus and Nitrogen
Phosphorus concentration does
not
appear as
a variable
in
any
of
the
early habitat suitability index models developed for this series, but it is of
fundamental
importance to lake productivity and can be used to predict other
A.23


water quality parameters.
Several models for predicting total
phosphorus (TP)
concentration in
lakes
have been developed (Vollenweider 1969,
1975;
Imboden
1974;
Dillon and Rigler 1975;
Snodgrass and Q'Melia
1975;
Vollenweiden
1975;
Larsen and Mercier 1976;
Lorenzen et al.
1976;
Canfield
and
Bachmann
1981).
These models
use a mass balance approach and typically include terms for rate
of phosphorus loading (a function of natural
drainage
basin
characteri stics,
precipitation,
and
human activity),
lake flushing,
and loss of phosphorus to
the sediments.
Nitrogen (N) also is an important plant nutrient and often limits primary
production where phosphorus (P) does not.
Lambou et al.
(1976) used the ratio
of the concentration of nitrogen to that of
phosphorus
(N:P)
to distinguish
lakes
in
which
phosphorus
is
the
limiting
nutrient
from
those
limited
by
nitrogen.
Lakes with N:P>14 were said to be phosphorus-limited and those with
N:P<10
were classified
as
nitrogen-limited.
Lakes with
intermediate
ratios
were characterized as transitional.
Nitrogen limitation
usually
occurs
only
in highly enriched waters (Wetzel
1975) and, even then, often lasts only for a
short time.
Long term processes,
such as
nitrogen
fixation,
act
to
correct
short term nitrogen deficiencies (Schindler 1977).
Nitrogen concentration in
lakes is generally an order of magnitude greater than phosphorus concentration,
and
phosphorus
is
usually
the
limiting
nutrient
(Wetzel
1975).
Phosphorus
appears to
be the limiting nutrient
in
most
midwestern
impoundments
(Walker
and
Kuhner
1979).
Nitrogen
limitation
can
occur seasonally in epilimnia of
lakes for which a lakewide budget would indicate a nitrogen surplus if most of
the
phosphorus enters
in
surface
runoff
and
most
nitrogen
enters the
hypo-
limnion via springs and ground water seepage (Loucks and Watson 1978).
Nutrient models can be used to predict the trophic status of lakes under
different conditions.
Tapp
(1976)
reported that the Vollenwider, Dillon, and
Larsen/Mercier
models
all
classified
66
southeastern
lakes
in
a
way
that
agreed with
National
Eutrophication
Survey
ratings.
The
Dillon and Larsen/
Mercier models performed somewhat better than the Vollenweider model
for a set
of 39 lakes (Hern et al.
1981).
Bradford and Q'Maiero (1978) used the Imboden
and Dillon models to predict the
likelihood of
cultural
eutrophication
in
a
proposed
reservoir.
Their
study
illustrated
the applicability
of
nutrient
loading - productivity relationships to water resource planning.
The rate of nutrient loading depends on the climate,
size,
geology,
land
use,
and population density of the drainage basin (Schindler 1971; Dillon and
Kirchner 1975).
Bedrock geology and
climate generally
can
be
considered
as
constants
when
making
water
quality
projections
for
different
years,
but
changes in human activity in the drainage basin must be considered in order to
effectively
apply
the nutrient models.
Several
authors
have discussed rela-
tionships between land use and nutrient loading (Keup 1968; Dillon and Kirchner
1975; Dillon
and
Rigler 1975;
Haith
1976;
Loucks and Watson 1978).
Concepts
reviewed and
developed in these
papers provide a basis for forecasting water
quality
conditions
in different target years,
given projections about future
land use patterns.
Sylvester (1957) predicted water quality conditions in the
Columbia River on the basis of anticipated changes in watershed usage.
Nutrient concentrations in reservoirs during and immediately after initial
filling
are
often
higher
than
would
be
expected
on
the
basis
of
nutrient
A.24


concentrations
in
inflowing
streams.
Additional
nutrients are released from
the decomposition of inundated vegetation and from inundated soils.
Nielson
(1967) outlined methods for predicting nutrient inputs to proposed reservoirs
from these
sources.
Henderson et al.
(1973)
noted that 5 to
15 years were
usually
required
before
the
productive
capacities
of
recently
impounded
tropical reservoirs stabilized.
Transparency
The concentration of chlorophyll a (chl a), an indicator of algal density,
can be predicted from TP concentrations and used to predict Secchi disk trans-
par~ncy (Sakamoto 1966; Dillon and Rigler 1974, 1975; Jones and Bachmann 1976;
Canfield and Bachmann 1981; Hern et al.
1981).
Correlations between TP and
chl a and between chl a and Secchi
depth are greater for
natural
lakes
than
for impoundments, perhaps because of higher nonalgal turbidities in the latter
(Wa"lker and Kuhner 1979; Canfield and Bachmann 1981).
High sediment
loads
limit light penetration and algal growth in some midwestern (Walker and Kuhner
1979) and Great Plains (Hergenrader and Hammer 1973) reservoirs.
Hern et al.
(1981) also discussed the distortions that high sediment loads may impart to
the TP - chl a - Secchi depth relationships.
Dissolved Oxygen
The rate of organic production in the surface layer affects the rate of
oxygen
depletion
in
bottom
strata.
Gilbertson
et al.
(1972)
reported
a
negative correlation between hypolimnetic oxygen concentration and phosphorus
loading rate for Lake Erie.
Cornett and Rigler (1979) showed that the rate of
oxygen depletion in the hypolimnia of oligotrophic lakes can be predicted as a
function
of
phosphorus retention,
average
hypolimnetic
temperature,
and the
average thickness of the hypolimnion.
Hutchinson (1938) documented a propor-
tional
relationship
between
plankton
standing crop and hypolimnetic oxygen
deficit
in Wisconsin
lakes,
indicating that transparency might
be a useful
predictor of
bottom dissolved oxygen concentrations.
Lasenby (1975) noted a
correlation between Secchi depth and areal
hypolimnetic oxygen deficit for 14
Ontario
lakes
and calculated a regression
equation
relating the two.
Such
equations
should
not
be applied outside of
the
region
for which they
were
derived;
the
relationship
should be evaluated and calibrated on a regional
basis.
These empirical methods also should be applicable to stratified impound-
ments
with
low flushing
rates.
This
includes
many storage reservoirs,
but
exc1udes most mainstream
impoundments.
Bottom waters
in
reservoi rs
of
the
latter type do not remain isolated from the surface for nearly as long as do
bottom waters in stratified lakes or storage reservoirs (Kittrell 1959).
This
does not necessarily mean that mainstream reservoirs will be well oxygenated.
Kittrell (1959) noted that reaeration may be limited in such reservoirs due to
relatively low surface area.
Many
of
the
models
for
predicting
dissolved
oxygen concentration
in
streams were
developed
as
planning
tool s
for
wastewater
management.
They
essentially treat the water in a stream or river as diluted sewage (Straskraba
1973) and are patterned after the early work of Streeter and Phel ps (1925).
A.25


These
models
contain
one
term to account for bacterial
oxidation of organic
matter and another for atmospheric reaeration.
More realistic models incorpor-
ate the effects of additional processes, such as respiration and photosynthesis
by the aquatic biota (Nielson 1967; Grenney et al. 1976; Grenney and Kraszewski
1981).
Basin Configuration
Erosion
and
sedimentation can dramatically alter re:oir basin config-
uration
in
a
relatively
short
period,
and
the
changes
.'6.y affect
habitat
sui tabil ity
for
fi shes
(Il l ina
and
Gordeyev 1970;
Benson 1980).
Shore 1i ne
modjfications
are
typically
most
rapid
immediately after filling,
when
the
shoreline is irregular and beaches
have
not formed
(Twenhofel
1961, cited in
Benson 1980).
Shore processes tend to
smooth irregular shorelines by eroding
headl ands
and
formi ng
sand
bars
across
the
mouths
of
bays.
Benson
(1980)
observed that the development of stable shore configuration and slope in large
reservoi rs
seems to requi re about 20 to 25 years.
II I ina and Gordeyev (1970)
reported that the inshore zone of a reservoir
in the
Soviet
Union
underwent
extensive modification during the first 27 years of operation and then appeared
to
stablilize.
If water
levels
fluctuate
widely,
beach
development
may
be
inhibited (Benson 1980).
Sediment is imported to reservoirs from their drainage basins.
Reservoirs
act as sediment traps and will
eventually fill
unless preventive or remedial
measures
are
taken.
The
rate
of
fi 11i ng depends
on
reservoi rand drainage
basin
characteristics,
such
as
size,
geology,
land
use,
and
precipitation
(Paulet et al. 1972).
These physical
processes also occur in
natural
lakes (Wilson 1935),
but
the radical
changes
in shoreline have,
in most cases,
already occurred,
and
sediment
loads
are
generally
lower
than
they
are
in
reservoirs
(Walker and
Kuhner 1979; Canfield and Bachmann 1981).
However, this depends a great deal
on land use in the drainage basin.
Fish
habitat evaluations
should consider the
probable occurrence of an
adjustment period after reservoir filling.
Unfortunately,
general
predictive
models
for
shore formation are not available (Benson 1980).
Case histories,
such as those provided by Benson (1980) for five Missouri River reservoirs are
very useful.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has supported some work concern-
ing the prediction of sediment loads and sedimentation rates in reservoirs.
A
bibliography of available documents (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1981) can be
obtained from the Hydrologic Engineering Center in Davis, California.
Stream Width, Depth, and Velocity
Width,
depth,
and
velocity
in
streams
are
dependent
on
discharge.
Computer
programs
(I FG-1,
Water
Surface
Profil e (WSP),
and
I FG-4)
have been
developed to predict these parameters as
a function of discharge (Milhous et
al.
1981).
These
hydraulic simulation
programs require precise measurements
of
water
depths
and
velocities.
Recommended
measurement
techniques
are
described in Bovee and Milhous (1978).
A.26


Aquatic and Wetland Vegetation
The following publications contain information that may be useful in the
prediction of vegetation composition and density.
They do not contain predic-
tive models, but do provide information concerning the occurrence of different
plant species and vegetation
types with
respect to
environmental
variables.
Boyd (1971:155) noted that "... where habitat for plant growth occurs, nothing
short of removing the habitat will prevent vegetational development".
Some of
the references are general; others are site or region specific.
Brief annota-
tions
are
included
for
some
of
the
references.
The
list
is
far
from
exhaustive.
Anderson,
R.
R.,
R.
G.
Brown, and R.
D.
Rappleye.
1968.
Water quality and
"
plant distribution along the upper Patuxent River, Maryland.
Chesapeake
Sci. 9:145-156.
Deals primarily with the estuarine distribution of emergent and submerged
macrophytes, with respect to salinity.
Boyd, C. E.
1971.
The
limnological
role of aquatic macrophytes
and their
relationship to reservoir management.
Pages 153-166 in G. E. Hall (ed.).
Reservoir fisheries and limnology.
Am. Fish. Soc. Spec--.Publ. 8.
Cowardin,
L. M., V. Carter, F. C. Golet,
and E. T. LaRoe.
1979.
Classifica-
tion
of wetlands and deepwater habitats of the United States.
U.S.D.l.
Fish Wildl. Serv., Off. Biol. Servo
FWS/OBS-79/31.
103 pp.
Fassett,
N.
C.
1930.
The
plants
of
some
northeastern
Wisconsin
lakes.
Trans. Wisc. Acad. Sci., Arts, Lett. 25:157-168.
Golet,
F. C., and J.
S.
Larson.
in the glaciated northeast.
Resour. Publ. 116.
56 pp.
1974.
Classification of freshwater wetlands
U.S. Bur. Sport Fish. Wildl. Washington,
DC.
Provides a classification scheme and descriptions of environmental condi-
tions under which different wetland types develop.
Also includes photo-
graphs of examples of wetlands types.
Hoffman, G.
R.
1978.
Shore vegetation of Lakes Oahe and Sakakawea, mainstem
Missouri River reservoirs.
Dept.
Biol., Univ. South Dakota, Vermillion,
SO.
206 pp.
Discusses inundation tolerance of different shoreline plants, effects of
cattle grazing, successional patterns, and recommendations for maximizing
shore vegetation.
Moyle, J.
B.
1945.
Some chemical
factors
influencing the distribution
of
aquatic plans in Minnesota.
Am. Midl. Nat. 34:402-420.
Discusses occurrence of
aquatic
plants
in
Minnesota,
with
respect
to
total alkalinity, pH, and sulphate ion concentration.
A.27


Peltier,
W.
H.,
and
E.
B.
Welch.
1969.
Factors affecting
the growth of
rooted aquatics in a river.
Weed Sci. 17:412-416.
Descri pti ve and experi menta1 study of the effects of depth,
turbi dity,
and
sediment
nutrient
concentrations
on
the
growth
of
plants
in
a
Tennessee river.
1970.
Factors affecting growth of rooted aquatic plants in a
reservoir.
Weed Sci. 18:7-9.
Discusses role of nutrients, light, and water level
in regulating plant
growth in an Alabama reservoir.
Penfound,
W.
T.
34:561-583.
1953.
Plant
communities
of
Oklahoma
lakes.
Ecology
Survey
of terrestrial
(nearshore),
wetland,
and aquatic
vegetation of
lakes and reservoirs throughout the State, with particular reference
to
climatic factors and lake conditions (water level fluctuations, sedimenta-
tion rates,
substrate, depth, and alkalinity).
Also discusses
implica-
tions of different water level regimes for vegetational succession.
Penfound,
W. T., T. F. Hall, and A.
D.
Hess.
1945.
The spring phenology of
plants
in
and around
the
reservoirs
in
north
Alabama
with
particular
reference to malaria control.
Ecology 26:332-352.
Contains
useful
information
on the
relative tolerance
of terrestrial,
wetland, and aquatic plants to inundation and desiccation.
Rawson,
D.
S.,
and J.
E. Moore.
1944.
The
saline
lakes
of
Saskatchewan.
Can. J. Res. 22:141-201.
Stewart,
R.
E.,
and
H.
A Kantrud.
1972.
Vegetation
of
pr-a i r i e potholes,
North Dakota,
in
relation
to qual ity of
water and other environmental
factors.
U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap. 585-0.
36 pp.
Swindale,
D.
N.,
and J.
T. Curtis.
1957.
Phytosociology of the larger sub-
merged plants in Wisconsin lakes.
Ecology 38:397-407.
Di scusses
envi ronmenta1 correlates
of
macrophyte
commun ity
structure,
especially substrate, depth, and conductivity.
Wilson,
L.
R.
Wisconsin.
1935.
Lake development and plant succession in Vilas County,
Ecol. Monogr. 5:207-247.
Discusses aquatic plant community structure in terms of lake successional
state.
Also describes the distribution of different types of vegetation
within lakes in relation to environmental factors.
1939.
Rooted
aquatic
plants
and
their
relation
to
the
limnology
of
freshwater
lakes.
Pages 107-122
in
F. R. Moulton (ed.).
Problems of lake biology.
Am. Assoc. Adv. Sci.
Pub~ 10, Science Press.
A.28


Zoltai, S. C., F. C. Pollett, J.
K. Keglum, and G.
D. Adams.
a
wetland
classification
for
Canada.
Pages
497-511
Forest Soils Conf., Laval Univ., Quebec, Canada.
RIVERINE AND LACUSTRINE DATA RECORDS
1973.
Developing
in
Proc.
N.
Am.
Figures A-4 and A-5 provide a means of recording habitat data and provide
a starting point for development of simplified forms for site specific applica-
tions.
Riv~rine Data Record
Pages 1 and 2 of Figure A-4 are used to record data for a single transect
site.
A tape should be stretched from one side of the bank to the other, at a
right angle to the stream channel.
Habitat conditions
for
each
appropriate
variable
are measured directly
underneath the
tape.
In large
streams,
the
tape may have to be attached to a cable for support.
When it is not feasible
to stretch a tape across a river, a range finder or plane table should be used
to determine positions.
Page 3 (Fig. A-4) summarizes field data for up to 10
transects.
Full
size copies of the riverine data record can be obtained by
writing to the address listed in the preface of this publication.
Instructions
for completing each page of the data record are provided below.
Riverine data record:
page 1.
Water resource
subregion -
enter the water resource
subregion
in which the
sample site is located.
Stream - enter the name of the stream.
Sampling area number - enter a code or descriptor to identify the exact area
being sampled.
Transect number - assign and enter the number of the transect being evaluated.
Stream width - enter the width of the stream, water edge to water edge, perpen-
dicular to the direction of water flow.
Channel width - enter the distance between normal high water marks.
Date - enter the date (month/day/year) that the survey was completed.
Investigators - enter the name(s) of the person(s) doing the sampling.
Bank for 0 point - check the appropriate boxes to indicate if the 0 point of
the -tape
is
on the right
bank or
the left bank and whether you were
looking upstream or downstream when determining right bank and left bank.
It is easier to interpret field data if all tape readings have a 0 point
on the same bank.
-
A.29


Page 1
Water resource subregion
__
Stream name---------------------
Sampling area #
___
Transect #
__
Stream width
Channel width
Date
/
/
Investi gators
_
Bank for Qpoint:
Right [] Left []
Looking upstream LJ
Looking downstream []
):10
wa
Instream cover
Pool measurements
Riparian area
~Vl
0'>
-CC::
~
~s-
Percent of ...
Tape reading
Vl
Q)
Tape reading
Pool rating
Bank
O'>~
c::c::
Q) 0
......
.s:
IO~
S
~
0
......
...... 0
~ ......
Vl
E~
Vl
VlVl
Bare
stabi 1ity
~
~c.
0'> ......
IO~
c::
-
-
I
~c.
~E
Vl
Q)..c
h
u~
C::~
-CIO
Q)
Q)
c.
~-
E
Q)
Vl
..c
Vl
s,
s,
c::
~Vl
1010
c::~
-c -c
Q)
-c
10 3:
...... -c
...... 0
Q)
~
VlO
~
~
R.
L.
Q) 10
..c ......
..c~
~Q)
0
Q)
0
..co
X
us-
Q)
s,
104-
U
s,
a
-c..c
VlS-
s,
Q)
c:: 0'>
·u
-c
E
Vl
~
10 ~
04-
s,
.s:
~cl:l
0
......
bank
bank
d
c::
~..c
Q)O'>
.......
Q)
0'>
-
- -
:::EO
~ I
l-
V>
a::
Cl
Start
End
:::l
s,
Q)
>Q)
>
Q)
Start
End
1
2
3
0
Q)
R L R L R L R L R L S MUS MU
l:C -c
0>
>
c.
>
e
Figure A-4.
Riverine data record.


Investigators
__
Bank for Q point:
Right 0
Left 0
Looking upstream 0
Looking downstream 0
Page 2
Time of day
_
/
/
Date'__..L__L-__
Stream name---------------------
Sampling area #
___
Transect #
_
Stream width
Channel width
__
Water resource subregion------------
»
w
......
Tape reading
Substrate type
Velocity
Water quality
--
E
Temperature
u
i'-
Q)
--
U
\0
E
Q)
It!
<;j-
U
-- --
U
4-
pH
/\
E
s --
\0
It!
s,
to
u
~
a
III
4-
:::l
~~
<;j-
III
s,
III
I
to
a
V
Q)
C'l
:::l
Dissolved 02
s-s-
to
(\J
\0
\0
'"
'"
III
3
Q)
0
(\J
I
I
I
~~
-0
-0
.~
0
-0
~~
\0
\0
\0
Q)
'"
-0
3
~
~
~~
~~
a
....,s-
-0
:::l
It!
0
Q)
Turbidity
-'"
:::l
s-s-
~O
-0
~
Q)
~
..a
u
0
Q)
0
Q)S-
~s-
~~
.~
Q)
s,
Q)
0
..a
-0
~O
Q)
0
III
..a
C'l
.s:
..a
I
s,
~
..a
>
-os-
<;
E
Q)
....,
Salinity
-0
:::l
..a
It!
'"
0
-0
Q)
~
0..
0..
\0
Start
End
Q)
C'l
0
:::l
s,
It!
:::l
It!
Q)
a
co
....l
co
~
(!)
Vl
::E
""-
e::>
l-
e::>
Al ka1inity
TDS
Tape reading
Fluctuation rating: _____
Permanent
Intermittent
Additional comments:
Figure A-4.
(continued)


Sampling area location
___
Water resource subregion -----------------------
Stream name
_
Flow conditions
__
Page 3
# transects in sample area
__
Distance between transects
Investigators
___
Date(s)
:t:o
w
N
Physical
Water quality
Other
Comments:
I
Fluctuation rating:
s,
.a
Q)
::::l
~
Vl
E
.s:
r-r-
Vl
N
::::l
+J
a
+JVl
Q)
0
e
-0
.s:
e
a
e",
s,
'3
+J
::::l
0.
"' r-
::::l
-0
~
+J
-0
s,
eu
~
+J
Q)
U
.,....
<;
Q)
'E
Q)
"'
>
.,....
Q)
E
3
Q)
C'l C'l
.,....
S-
r-
-0
Vl
ro
r- ..c
roc
O+J
e
Q)
a
.,....
e
Q)
r-
~ +J
S-.,....
-0",
.,....
0.
Vl
~
ro
S-
o
~"P
Q)+J
Q)S-
r-
E
Vl
S-
S-
+J
a
or- or-
>ro
S-+J
ro
Q)
:::I:
.,....
::::l
l-
V>
a...
0::3
C:(S-
a... Vl
V>
I-
0.
0
l-
I---
Permanent
Intermi ttent
f--
f--
Average annual
discharge:
I---
I---
I---
f---
Other:
f------
-
~
Figure A-4.
(concluded)


Page 1
Name of lake or reservoir
Latitude ------
Water resource subregion
Longitude
_
El evati on (m)
Surface area (ha)
Volume (m3)
Mean depth (m)
Maximum depth (m)
Length of shoreline (km)
Shoreline development factor
StoraQe ratio
Flushing rate (days)
Water level fluctuation
Inlets:
Surrounding topography &vegetation:
Outlets:
Remarks: -----------
Figure A-5.
Lacustrine data record.
A.33


N
QJ
C'>
ttl
0..
QJ
S-o
..s::::
VI
+-l
U
QJ
VI
C
ttl
+-l
S-
U
+-l
QJ
S-
VI
QJ
S-
C
ttl
.a
0
ttl
QJ
E
4-
S-
S-
:::3
+-l
ttl
C
+-l
C
4-
C'>
+-l
0
C
U
0
QJ
0-
..s::::
r-
VI
+-l
0-
C
0
C'>
E
ttl
S-
C
ttl
S-
QJ
QJ
V)
l-
N
...J
S-
......
0>S-
QJ
VI
QJ
S-
S-
O
VI
QJ
S-
.;,,:
0
ttl
+-l
ttl
C'>
4-
0
+-l
VI
QJ
QJ
QJ
E
+-l
>
ttl
ttl
C
z:
Cl
......
..s::::
llldaa
+-l
0-
QJ
Cl
a:)U-elS~a
ssaupappaqwa %
(
-
)
..10
(90'0 »
H~S
.--.
(
)
..10
~
-
c
(2-90'0) pu-eS
QJ
......
+-l
(
)
..10
ttl
ft
-
S-
QJ
(09-2)
LaA'e..l9
+-l
N
VI
......
.a
VI
:::3
---
(
)
..10
V)
-
QJ
(092-09)
aLqqn~
0-
~
(
)
..10
(092 <) s..IapLnog
"0
QJ
C
U
l.J.I
C
ttl
+-l
+-l
S-
VI
......
ttl
Cl
+-l
V)
AHsuap
uO~+'ela5aA
uon 'ela6aA
papoOL.:l
QJ
uO~l-ela6aA
0-
:)~l-enb'lf
S-
~
QJ
>
..Iaqw~l 's60L
0u
's~..Iqap 'llsn..l8
sa~+~A-eJ
s..IapLno8
"0
QJ
C
U
l.J.I
C
ttl
+-l
+-l
S-
VI
......
ttl
Cl
+-l
V)
A.34
......
~
l::o
U
.
LCl
I
c::(
Q)
S-
::::l
en
......
u,


Name of lake or reservoir
__
Dateltime
_
Investigators
___
Weather: air temp.
sky
~-----
wind direct.
velocity
_
Page 3
Sampling area ----------
Transect number ---------
Station ----------------
Water depth
___
Secchi depth
__
Comments
__
water surface ------------------------------------
Water quality measurement
QI
QI
s,
~
U
~
-c
C
~
+>
QI
.....
Uttl
ttl
>
C
•.... +>
.....
~
.--
C
.....
4-u
-c
QI
OQl
.--
.....
~
.....
0.
til
Ol
ttl
U-C
.0
E
til>,
~
QlC
U'l
s;
Depth
QI
.....
X
:::I:
.--
0.0
el
~
I-
elO
0.
ex:
U'l
U
l-
I-
Surface
figure A-5.
(concluded)
A/35


Instream cover - record the starting and ending
reading
on the tape for each
of the classes of cover encountered along the tape.
Check the appropriate
box for each readi ng.
When
more
than
one
class of cover
occurs at
the
same
tape
point,
e.g.,
a
submerged
log
beneath
an
area of overhanging
vegetation,
record the tape readi ngs and
check
the
appropri ate
box
for
each class.
Suggested definitions of cover classes are given below.
Undercut bank -
the lip of the bank overhangs the edge of the water, and
there is less than 0.5 m between the water surface and the underside
of the bank at a specified flow.
Brush,
logs,
and debris piles - leaves, stems, branches,
logs, and other
manmade or natural debris.
Overhanging
vegetation
-
bank
vegetation
that
is
within
0.5 m of
the
water surface.
Inundated
vegetation
-
submerged and
emergent aquatic vegetation and/or
inundated terrestrial vegetation.
Vegetation
density
code
-
estimate
the
percentage
of
the
area
of
the
water
column or bottom occupied
by plant materials at the surface,
middepth,
and
bottom from a vertical
projection downward along
the
transect.
Use
a width
of
0.1 m on
each
side
(upstream
and down-
stream) of the tran sect.
For each of
the
three
depths,
enter
the
appropriate
letter
or
number
categories
for
the
density class
of
vegetation observed.
For example,
A3c would
indicate
~ 70%
surface density,
< 30% mid-
depth density, and < 30% bottom density of vegetation.
Percent covered
Surface
Middepth
Bottom
A)
> 70%
1)
> 70%
a)
> 70%
B)
30-70%
2)
30-70%
b)
30-70%
C)
> 0 to < 30%
3)
> 0 to < 30%
c)
> 0 to < 30%
D)
0
4)
0
d)
0
Pool
measurements
-
record
beginning
and
ending
tape
reading
for
each
pool
encountered along the transect.
Areas
along
the
transect that
are
not
pools
are
considered riffles or runs.
A.P.2.2.l is defined as
an area of
the stream with
reduced current that is usually deeper than the average
stream depth.
Check the appropri ate
pool
rating for each poo 1,
based on
observations of the entire pool,
not just the area
on
the
transect.
A
rating for
a pool
will
be entered each time it is crossed by a transect.
Ratings are as follows:
A.36


a)
Class 1 pool:
Large and deep.
Pool depth and size are sufficient
to
provide a low velocity resting area for several adult fish.
More
than 30% of the pool bottom is obscured due to depth, surface turbu-
lence,
or the presence of structures, e.g., logs, debris, boulders,
or overhanging banks and vegetation.
Or, the greatest pool depth is
~ 1.5 m in streams
~ 5 mwide or
~ 2 mdeep in streams> 5 mwide.
b)
Class 2 pool:
Moderate
size
and depth.
Pool depth and size are
sufficient to
provide a low velocity resting area
for a few adult
fish.
From 5 to 30% of the bottom is obscured due to surface turbu-
1ence, depth, or the presence of structures.
Typica1 second
cl ass
pools are large eddies behind boulders and low velocity, moderately
deep areas beneath overhanging banks and vegetation.
c)
Class 3 pool:
Small or shallow or both.
Pool depth and size are
sufficient to
provide a
low velocity resting area for one to very
few adul t fi sh.
Cover, if present, is in the form of shade,
surface
turbul ence, or very 1imited
presence of structures.
Typica1 thi rd-
class pools are wide, shallow pool areas of streams or small
eddies
behind boulders.
The entire bottom of a third class pool can usually
be seen.
Maximum pool depth - enter maximum depth of pool.
Velocity at
depth from surface -
enter the velocity
reading
taken at
a
specifi~location and depth from the surface of the pool.
Record loca-
tion under tape reading.
For example, if the maximum depth is 2 m,
then
a velocity measured at 0.8 depth would be 1.6 m below the surface.
Depth
of measurement is determined by model requirements.
Riparian
area -
record the
percentage of
the
riparian
area
that
would be
covered
by a vertical
projection downward of the canopy closure of the
vegetative class (trees,
shrubs,
and grasses/forbs)
and the
percentage
that is bare ground (rocks and dirt) for each bank.
Because ·of overlap
in canopy closure, such as when shrubs occur under trees, the
sum of the
percentage cover for all of the vegetative classes may exceed 100%.
Methods for
estimating
canopy closure are given in Hays et al.
(1981).
It is recommended that a bank area at least 3 m landward from the stream
bank be evaluated.
Bank stability - enter one of the following codes:
S -
stable, little evidence of new bank sluffing scars (::. 10%).
M-
moderately stable, new bank sluffing scars (> 10% - ::. 30%)
U -
unstable,
considerable
new
bank
sluffing
conditions
apparent
(>
30%) .
Shade -
record maximum % of stream surface that is
shaded
between 1000
and
1400 hours in midsummer at the transect location.
A.37


Instructions for completing the riverine data record:
page 2.
Water resource
subregion,
stream,
sampl ing
area
number,
transect
number
-
enter the same information recorded on page 1.
Stream width - enter the width of the stream measured from water edge to water
edge, perpendicular to the direction of water flow.
Channel width - enter the distance between the normal high water marks.
Date, Time of day, Investigators - enter the appropriate information.
Time of day - enter the time of day the water quality measurements were made.
Bank for 0 point - check the appropriate boxes to indicate if the 0 point of
the tape is on the right bank or left bank and whether you were looking
upstream or downstream when determining right bank and left bank.
It is
easier to interpret field data if all tape readings have a 0 point on the
same bank.
-
Tape reading - start and end -
record the starting and ending tape readings
for each substrate type located along the surface of the bottom below the
tape and check the appropriate box.
Substrate
type
-
If
substrate
types
are
intermixed,
enter
the
estimated
percentage of the surface area of the bottom covered by each type instead
of the check described above.
Blanks are provided for alternate substrate
size class definitions.
% embeddedness - record the percent depth to which boulders, rubble, or gravel
are buried in silt or sand.
Dry ground - enter beginning and ending tape reading for areas of the channel
without water, and check the appropriate box.
If the substrate type in
the dry areas is an important consideration to the project, it can also
be classified and recorded.
Blank column - enter any additional
transect
information
needed for
the
HSI
model.
Velocity -
measure
the velocity at each third of
the
stream width
or more
often, if necessary, and record the tape reading point and water depth of
the
measurement.
Velocity
measurements
made
at
0.6
depth
below the
surface
will
approximate
average
column
velocity
(Bovee
and
Milhous
1978).
An additional
box is included for optional velocity measurements
at other depths.
Always measure
the
average
velocity
of
the
thalweg
(deepest point).
Blank column
- additional depth and tape readings, without velocity measure-
ments,
can
be entered
in
order
to
develop
a detailed
cross
section
profile.
A.38


Water quality measurements - measure the selected water quality variables.
Be
sure that the time of day that the measurements were made or
sample was
collected
is
recorded.
Record
tape
reading
at
measurement
site
if
measurements are taken along transects.
Alkalinity
-
unless
otherwise
specified,
this
refers
to
total
alkalinity
(HC03-,
C03=,
and OH-)
and should be measured as
mg CaCO/l.
Detailed
analytical
procedures are
given
in
American
Public
Health
Association
(1971) and Lind (1979).
Total dissolved
solids
(TDS)
-
residue
after
water
is
evaporated
from
a
filtered
sample dried to a constant weight at 1800 C.
A standard glass
fiber filter disk should
be used.
TDS
is
usually
reported in mg/l or
parts per million (ppm).
TDS data for major streams are available from
the U.S. Geological Survey.
Temperature - temperature readings should be made concurrently with dissolved
oxygen readings and at the times and locations specified in the models.
pH - preferably
determined
with
an
electronic
pH
meter.
If
necessary,
a
colorimetric method (indicator
solutions
or
litmus
paper)
can be used.
pH values tend to be highest when photosynthetic activity is high.
Dissolved oxygen - usually determined by the Winkler method (American Public
Health Association
1971).
If a meter is used, it should be calibrated
first.
Concentrations of oxygen are usually expressed as mg/l, parts per
million
(ppm),
or
percent saturation.
Minimum dissolved oxygen levels
norma lly occur just pri or to
sunri se duri ng the
summer months or after
prolonged ice and snow cover in winter.
Turbidity - can be determined using a commercial turbidimeter or a colorimeter
wi th accompanying table to convert from meter
un i ts
to
turbi di ty
un its
(Lind
1979).
Standard
units
are
Jackson
Turbidity
Units
(JTU)
or
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU).
Salinity - weight of salts dissolved in 1 kg of water,
after all
carbonates
have been converted to oxides, all bromides and iodides have been replaced
by chlorides, and all organic matter has been oxidized.
Usually expressed
as parts per thousand.
See American Public Health Association (1971) for
analytical procedures.
Fluctuation
rating
-
record
rating
(e.g.,
minor,
moderate,
or
severe),
frequency
(e.g.,
annual,
seasonal,
or
frequent),
and time of year of
maximum fluctuation.
Quantitative definition
of
the
ratings
should be
included.
No standard rating system was found during the development of
the data record.
Permanent/Intermittent
-
check
appropriate
description
for
transect
being
sampled.
A.39


Instructions for completing the riverine data record:
page 3.
Sampling area # - record the identifying information entered on pages 1 and 2
for the transects being summarized.
Water resource subregion - enter water resource subregion from page 1 of the
data record.
Stream name - enter stream name.
Flow conditions - record flow conditions (e.g.,
low, average,
or high) during
transect
sampling.
If possible,
record actual
discharge
rather than a
qualitative statement.
# transects in sample area - enter the total number of transects in the sample
area.
Distance between transects - enter the distance between transects.
Investigators - enter name(s) of field investigators.
Date( s)
-
1i st
range
of dates duri ng whi ch transects were measured (i. e. ,
7-10 July 1981).
Transect number - consecutively list the numbers of the transects sampled in
the sample area.
Data are summarized for each transect in the remaining
columns.
Physical - summarize the physical data for each transect as follows:
Stream width - enter stream width for each transect from page 2 of
the
data record.
Pool width -
total transect distance that crosses pools is determined by
subtracting the starting tape readings from the ending tape readings
(from
page 1)
for
each
pool
on the
transect
and
summing
these
distances.
Riffle/run width - total transect distance in riffles and runs.
Record
the stream width for each transect minus the pool width.
Average pool rating - multiply the pool rating for each section of pool
recorded on the transect by the corresponding pool width, and divide
the sum of products by the sum of the pool widths.
Predominant substrate class - enter the substrate class that was the most
common for each transect.
Additional blanks - measurements of other model variables needed in order
to calculate species HSI's can be entered in the blank columns.
A.40


Water qual ity measurements - enter the water qual ity data
for
the transects
(from page 2) for each variable measured.
Other -
record
any other
information in these columns that was collected on
the transects.
Comments - this section is used to record information, applicable to the entire
sample reach, that may help in data interpretation.
Fluctuation rating - enter fluctuation data from page 2.
Permanent/intermittent - enter data from page 2.
Average annual discharge - enter data from discharge records.
Gradient - record the vertical drop in elevation per unit distance.
Other - record any additional data collected but not entered on forms.
Lacustrine Data Record
Instructions for completing the lacustrine data record:
page 1.
This
page contains a listing of geographic, morphometric, and hydrologic variables
for lacustrine habitats for which data can usually be obtained without a site
visit.
These variables are defined below and sources
of
data
included when
available.
Name of lake or reservoir - enter name of body of water.
Water resource
subregion
-
enter
the
number( s) of
the water
resource
sub-
region(s) in which the water body is located.
Latitude - enter latitude in degrees and minutes.
Longitude - enter longitude in degrees and minutes.
Elevation - outlet or spillway elevation above sea level.
Surface area - surface area of lake (reservoir) at full capacity.
Water level
elevation
for
which
surface
area
was calculated
should
be specified.
Other surface areas
(e. g.,
average
or
mi nimum)
may be 1i sted if
i den-
tified.
Volume - volume at full capacity.
Mean depth - volume divided by surface area.
depth measurements taken along transects.
at time of data collection.
Mean depth can be estimated from
Specify water surface elevation
Maximum depth - maximum depth at full capacity.
Use contour maps or transect
measurements to determine depth.
A.41


Length of shoreline - length of perimeter of water body at specified capacity.
Shoreline development factor
-
length of the
shoreline
(L)
divided
by the
length of the circumference of a circle with a surface area (A) equivalent
to that of the lake, that is:
L
SDF = 2~
The ratio is dimensionless and has a minimum value of 1 (circular lake).
Storage ratio - ratio of the volume of the water body to its average
annual
discharge.
Flushing rate - the number of days required for a volume of water equivalent
to the
reservoir
volume to
be discharged.
Divide
the
volume
of
the
reservoir by the daily discharge for the specified time period.
Water level
fluctuation
-
record
amount (e.g.,
minor,
moderate,
or severe),
frequency (annual,
seasonal, or frequent),
and time of year of
maximum
fluctuation.
Use quantitative fluctuation data whenever possible.
Inlets - identify inflowing streams and rivers.
Outlets - identify outflowing streams and rivers.
Surroundi ng
topography
and vegetation
-
descri be
re 1ief
and vegetation of
shorel ine area.
Remarks - record any other pertinent data.
Lacustrine data record:
page 2.
This
page is
completed
when
transects
are
used
to
sample
lacustrine
habitat.
Sampling along a transect may be continuous or at discrete points.
In either case, the starting (zero) point of the transect from which distance
will be measured must be established.
Habitat variable data should be recorded
in terms of distance from this reference point.
Distances can be determined
wi th a rangefi nder.
A seri es of hi ghly vi sib1e, anchored buoys can be used
when sampling a long transect.
Distances recorded should coincide with signif-
icant changes in values for the parameter of interest,
such as cover or sub-
strate.
In the case of depth, only poi nts at whi ch the slope of
the bottom
changes appreciably need be recorded.
Intervening depths can be determined by
interpolation.
Unless the water is very transparent, direct visual observations from the
surface
will
be
limited
to
shallow water.
The
simplest
way to
determine
values for deeper areas is to interpolate measurements after sampling a series
of discrete points along a transect,
using remote sampling gear (for example,
A.42


a bottom grab,
echosounder,
or
sounding
line).
The number
and
spacing
of
sampling stations will depend on the uniformity of the lake and the degree of
resolution required.
Name of lake or reservoir - enter name of water body.
Date - enter date on which sampling occurred.
Investigators - enter name(s) of person(s) doing the sampling.
Sampling area - enter the designated name,
number, or letter of the sampling
area.
Transect number - enter the number of the transect being evaluated.
If more
than one page is required to complete the transect,
record
page number
and tota 1 number of pages (e. g., page 1 of 3).
Zero point for transect (shore) - specify the point from which distances are
being measured (for example, SW shore).
Length of transect - record the total length of the transect.
Cover -
record
the
starting
and
ending
distance
for
each
class
of
cover
encountered along the transect,
and check the appropriate box.
When two
or more classes of cover occur together, list each separately.
Density
of
vegetation
can also
be recorded
(see
below).
Definitions of
cover
classes are listed below.
Data for
an additional
user-specified class
can be recorded in the blank column.
Boulders - all rocks with the longest axis greater than 250 mm.
Cavities - all cavities beneath rocks, logs, or debris.
A minimum cavity
size should be defined based on species use of cavities.
Brush, debris, logs, timber - includes natural
or manmade debris and all
woody or herbaceous material s , such as leaves, stems, branches, and
standing timber.
Aquatic
vegetation
-
includes
all
submerged,
emergent,
and
floating
aquatic plants.
Flooded vegetation - inundated terrestrial vegetation.
Vegetation density - using a vertical
projection from the transect downward,
estimate the percentage of the area of the water column or bottom occupied
by plant materials at the surface, middepth, and bottom.
Use a width of
0.1 m on each
side of
the transect.
Enter the appropriate letter and
number codes from the list below.
A.43


Surface
Middepth
Bottom
A)
> 70%
1)
> 70%
a)
> 70%
B)
30-70~~
2)
30-70%
b)
30-70%
C)
> 0 and < 30%
3)
> 0 and < 30%
c)
> 0 and < 30%
D)
0
4)
0
d)
0
Substrate -
record the starting and endi ng di stance for each substrate type
1i sted, and check the appropri ate box.
If two
or
more
substrate
types
are intermixed, enter percentage (by weight) of each type in the appropri-
. ate boxes.
Blanks are provided for user-specified substrate class sizes.
Percent
embeddedness
-
a measure
or
estimate
of
the
depth
(%)
to
whi ch
boulders, rubble, or gravel are buried in silt or sand.
Depth - record the distance along
for selected points along the
to
be
recorded
are
those
appreciably.
the transect and the depth at that distance
transect.
The only depth points that need
where
the
slope
of
the
bottom
changes
Lacustrine data record:
page 3.
This page is used to record water quality data from littoral
and pelagic
sampl ing stations.
These sampl ing stations do not need to be located on the
transects to sample cover, substrate,
and depth.
One water quality station
should be located at the deepest part of the lake (reservoir).
If more than
one distinct basin exists, a station should be established at the deepest part
of
each
basin.
One
"deepwater"
station will
often
be sufficient to
char-
acterize the conditions in the pelagic zone at a given time and for a given
basin.
Littoral areas are usually more variable and require more stations.
Name of lake or reservoir - enter name of water body being sampled.
Date/time - enter the date and time of day the data are collected.
Investigators - enter name(s) of person(s) doing the sampling.
Weather - enter air temperature,
sky conditions (e.g., clear, partly cloudy,
or overcast),
wi nd di rect i on and approximate ve1ocity, and condition
of
water surface (e.g., calm, rippled, or slight chop).
Sampling area - enter the designated name, letter, or number of the sampling
area.
Transect
number (if applicable)
-
enter
the
transect
number
if
the
water
qual ity station is located on a transect used for cover,
substrate, and
depth measurements.
A.44


Station
-
identify and locate the
station
by name
or
position (e.g.,
grid
coordinates or distance along a transect).
Water depth - enter depth at sampling station.
Secchi depth - enter Secchi disk transparency, as defined by Wetzel (1975).
Comments
-
enter any additional
information
concerning
sampling conditions,
procedures, or equipment that would be helpful in data interpretation.
Depth - record depth associated with water quality measurement or sample.
Water quality
measurement
-
record
water
quality
value
under
appropriate
column,
in
row corresponding to depth of measurement or sample.
Include
un its of
mea surement.
If a water
samp 1e
wa s taken
for
1ater ana lys is,
record
the
identification
code
for
the
sample.
Space
is
provided
for
more measurements than will
normally be made at a given
time.
Certain
water
quality
parameters
may
not
be
relevant
to
a
particular
study;
columns corresponding to these variables should be ignored.
Some param-
eters may only need to be sampled at one depth.
Temperature and dissolved
oxygen should be measured at more than one depth.
Temperature should be
the
first
parameter
measured
at
a
given
station.
Record
temperature
measurements
for
surface,
bottom,
and
intermediate
depths
at
sample
poi nts
where
the
temperature or temperature
gradi ent
changes.
If the
temperature
profile
indicates
that
the
water
column
is
well
mixed,
measurements at a single point (e.g., at middepth) for other water quality
variables
are
apt
to
be
sufficient.
A blank
column
is
included
for
additional parameter(s) of interest.
Temperature - temperature readings should be made concurrently with dissolved
oxygen readings and at the times and locations specified in the models.
Dissolved oxygen - usually determined by the Winkler method (American Public
Health Association
1971).
If a meter is used, it should be calibrated
first.
Concentrations of oxygen are usually expressed as mg/l, parts per
million
(ppm),
or
percent
saturation.
Minimum dissolved oxygen
levels
normally occur just prior to sunrise during the
summer months or after
prolonged ice and snow cover in winter.
Spatial and temporal distribution
of oxygen concentrations are discussed in Wetzel (1975).
pH - preferably
determined
with
an
electronic
pH
meter.
If
necessary,
a
colorimetric method (indicator
solutions
or
litmus
paper)
can be used.
pH
values
tend
to
be
highest
when
photosynthetic
activity
is
high.
Spatial and temporal variation of pH is described by Wetzel (1975).
Alkalinity
- unless otherwise specified, total
el kal i ni ty (HC03-,
C03=, OH-)
should
be
measured
as
mg
CaCO/l.
Detai led analytical
procedures are
given in American Public Health Association (1971) and Lind (1979).
Salinity -
weight
of salts dissolved in
1 kg of water, after all
carbonates
have been converted to oxides, all bromides and iodides have been replaced
A.45


by chlorides, and all organic matter has been oxidized.
Usually expressed
as parts per thousand.
See American Public Health Association (1971) for
analytical procedures.
Specific conductance - reciprocal
of the specific resistance of a solution as
measured between two 1 em"
electodes
placed 1 cm
apart
(Wetzel
1975).
Usually
measured
with
a conductivity meter and expressed
in
umhos/cm.
The temperature at which the measurement is made should be recorded.
Total dissolved solids (TDS) - residue after water is evaporated from a filter-
ed sample dried to a constant weight at 1800 C.
A standard glass fiber
filter disk should be used.
TDS is usually reported in mg/l or parts per
mi 11 ion
(ppm).
TDS data for many major streams are avai 1ab1e from the
U.S. Geological Survey.
Turbidity - may be determined using a commercial turbidimeter or a colorimeter
with
accompanying table
to
convert data
from meter units to turbidity
units (Lind 1979).
Standard units are Jackson Turbidity Units (JTU) or
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU).
REFERENCES
Aagaard,
F.
C.
1969.
Temperature of surface waters in Montana.
Mont.
Fish
and Game Comm., Helena, MT.
613 pp.
Aggus, L. R., and D.I. Morais.
1979.
Habitat suitability index equations for
reservoirs based on standing crop of fish.
Natl. Reservoir Res. Program.
Rept.
to U.S.
Fish Wildl. Servo Habitat Evaluation Proj., Fort Collins,
CO.
120 pp.
American
Public
Health
Association,
American Water Works
Association,
and
Water Pollution
Control
Federation.
1971.
Standard
methods
for
the
examination of water and wastewater, 13th ed.
Am.
Public Health Assoc.,
Washington, DC.
874 pp.
Anderson,
E.
R.
1954.
Energy budget studies.
Pages 71-119
in Water
loss
investigations:
Lake Hefner studies, technical report.
U.~ Geol. Surv.
Prof. Pap. 269.
Avrett, J.
R.,
and L.
E.
Carroon.
1964.
Ala. Geol. Surv. lnf. Ser. 35.
165 pp.
Temperature
of
Alabama
streams.
(Cited in Pauszek 1972).
Balon, E. K.
1975.
Reproductive guilds of fishes: a proposal and definition.
J. Fish. Res. Board Can. 32:821-864.
Benson, N. G.
1980.
Effects of past-impoundment shore modifications on fish
populations in Missouri River reservoirs.
U.S.D.I. Fish and Wildl. Servo
Res. Rep. 80.
32 pp.
Binns,
N. A.
1982.
Habitat quality
index
procedures manual.
Wyoming
Game
and Fish Dept. Cheyenne, WY.
209 pp.
A.46


Binns,
N. A.,
and
F. M. Eiserman.
1979.
Quantification
of
fluvial
trout
habitat in Wyoming.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 108(3):215-228.
Blakey, J.
F.
1966.
Temperature of surface waters in the conterminous United
States.
U.S. Geol. Surv. Hydrol. Inv. Atlas HA-235.
Bovee,
K.
D.
1978.
The incremental method of assessing habitat potential for
coolwater species,
with
management
implications.
Am.
Fish.
Soc.
Spec.
Publ.11:340-346.
Bovee,
K. D.,
and
R.
Milhous.
1978.
studies:
theory
and
techniques.
Fish Wildl. Servo
FWS/OBS-78/33.
Hydraulic
simulation
in
instream flow
Instream
Flow Inf.
Pap.
5.
U.S.D.L
131 pp.
Boyd, C. E.
1971.
The
limnological
role
of aquatic
macrophytes
and their
relationship to reservoir management.
Pages 153-166 in
G. E. Hall
(ed.).
Reservoir fisheries and limnology.
Am. Fish. Soc.
Spe~Publ. 8.
Bradford,
W.
L.,
and
D. J. Maiero.
1978.
reservoir
management.
J.
Environ.
104:981-996.
Lake
process
models
app 1i ed
to
Eng .
Di v.,
Am .
Soc.
Ci v.
Eng .
Brigham,
W. V.,
and
D. L. Hay.
1981.
A
strategies for water quality management.
EPA-600/2-81-217.
92 pp.
stress
function
for
evaluating
U.S.
Environ. Protection Agency.
Brown,
G. W.
1970.
Effect
of
clear-cutting
on
stream temperature.
Water
Resour. Res. 6:1133-1139.
Brown,
G.
W.,
and
J. T. Krygier.
1969.
Predicting
temperatures
of
small
streams.
Water Resour. Res. 5:68-75.
Burt, W.
V.
1957.
A second
forecast
of
temperature conditions
in
Brownlee
Reservoir and in the Snake River below Brownlee
Dam.
School of Science,
Oregon
State Univ.,
Corvallis,
OR.
Tech.
Rep.
4 to
the
U.S.D.L
Fish
Wildl. Servo
Ref. 57-5.
10 pp.
1958.
Heat
budget
terms
for
middle
Snake
River
reservoirs.
School
of
Science,
Oregon
State Univ., Corvallis,
OR.
Tech.
Rep.
6 to
the U.S.D.L Fish Wildl. Servo
Ref. 58-7.
23 pp.
Canfield,
D.
E.,
and R.
W.
Bachmann.
1981.
Prediction
of total
phosphorus
concentrations, chlorophyll a, and Secchi depths in natural and artificial
lakes.
Can. J. Fish. Aquatic Sci. 38:414-423.
Cornett ,
R. J.,
and
F. H.Rig1er .
1979 .
Hypol imnion
0 xygendef i cits :
the i r
prediction and interpretation.
Science 205:580-581.
Delay,
W.
H.,
and J.
Seaders.
1966.
Predicting temperatures
in
rivers and
reservoirs.
J. Sanitary Eng. Div., Proc. Am. Soc. Civil Eng. 92:115-134.
A.47


Dillon,
P. J., and F. H.
Rigler.
1974.
A test of a simple nutrient budget
mode1 predi cti ng
the phosphorus
concentration
in
1ake water.
J.
Fi sh.
Res. Board Can. 31:1771-1778.
1975.
A simple method for predicting the capacity of a
lake
for development based on lake trophic status.
J.
Fish.
Res. Board Can.
32:1519-1531.
Di 11 on, P. J., and W.
B.
Ki rchner.
1975.
The effects of geology and 1and use
on the export of phosphorus from watersheds.
Water Res. 9:135-148.
Duff, D. A., and J.
L. Cooper.
1976.
Techniques for conducting stream habitat
surveys on National resource land.
U.S.D.I. Bur. Land Manage. Tech.
Note
283.
72 pp.
Dunham,
D.
K., and A. Collotzi.
1975.
The transect method of stream habitat
inventory.
Guidelines
and applications.
U.S.D.A.
For.
Serv.,
Inter-
mountain Region, Ogden, UT.
98 pp.
Environmental
Laboratory.
1982.
CE-QUAL-Rl:
A numerical
one-dimensional
model of reservoir water quality; user's manual.
Instruction Rep. E-82-1,
U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, CE, Vicksburg, MS.
Farmer,
A. H.,
M. J. Armbruster,
J.
W. Terrell,
and
R. L. Schroeder.
In
press.
Habitat models for land use planning:
Assumptions and strategies
for development.
Trans. N. Am. Wildl. Nat. Resour. Conf. 47.
Gilbertson, M., H.
H. Dobson, and T. R. Lee.
1972.
Phosphorus and hypolimnial
dissolved oxygen in Lake Erie.
Pages 141-145 in
N.
M. Burns and C. Ross
(eds.).
Project
Hypo ....
An
intensive studyof the
Lake
Erie central
basin hypolimnion and related surface water phenomena.
Canada Centre for
Inland Waters, Burlington, Ontario, Canada, Pap. 6; U.S. Environ. Protec-
tion Agency Tech. Rep. TS-05-71-208-24.
Golden,
H.
G.
1959.
Temperature observations of Mississippi
streams.
Miss.
Board Water Commi ssioners Bull. 59-1.
67 pp.
(Cited in Pauszek 1972).
Greeney,
W. J.,
and A.
K. Kraszewski.
1981.
the
stream
simulation
and
assessment
U.S.D.I. Fish Wildl. Servo
FWS/OBS-81/46.
Description and application of
model:
Version IV
(SSAM IV).
199 pp.
Grenney,
W. J.,
D. B. Porcella, and M.
L. Cleave.
1976.
Water quality rela-
tionships to flow-streams and estuaries.
Pages 35-87 in C. B. Stalnaker
and J.
L. Arnette (eds.).
Methodologies for the determination of stream
resource fl ow requi rements:
An
assessment.
U. S. D. I.
Fi sh
Wi 1dl.
Serv.
FWS/OBS-76/03.
199 pp.
Grimsrud,
G. P.,
E. J. Finnemore, and H. J. Owen.
1976.
Evaluation of water
qua1i ty models:
a management gui de for planners.
Systems Control, Inc.,
Palo Alto, CA (EPA Contract 68-01-2641).
177 pp.
A.48


Haith,
D. A.
1976.
Land
use
and water
quality
in
New
York
rivers.
J.
Environ. Eng. Div., Am. Soc. Civ. Eng. 102:1-15.
Harmeson,
R. H.,
and V.
M. Schnepper.
1965.
Temperatures of
surface waters
in Illinois.
Illinois State Water Survey.
Report of Invest. 49.
Urbana,
IL.
45 pp.
Hays, R. L.,
C. Summers,
and
W. Seitz.
1981.
Estimating
wildl ife
habitat
variables.
U.S.D.I. Fish Wildl. Servo
FWS/OBS-81/47.
111 pp.
Henderson, H. F., R. A. Ryder, and A.
W. Kudhongania.
1973.
Assessing fishery
potentials
of
lakes
and
reservoirs.
J.
Fish.
Res.
Board
Can.
30:2000-2009.
Hergenrader,
G. L.,
and
M. J. Hammer.
1973.
Eutrophication
of
small
reservoirs
in
the
Great
Plains.
Pages 560-566
in
W. C. Ackermann,
G. F. White,
and E. B. Worthington (eds).
Man-made lakes: Their problems
and
environmental
effects.
Geophys.
Monogr.
17,
Am.
Geophys.
Union,
Washington, DC.
Hern, S. C.,
V.
W.
Lambou,
and L. R. Williams.
1978.
Comparisons of models
predicting ambient lake phosphorus concentrations.
U.S. Environ.
Protec-
tion Agency, Natl. Eutrophication Surv. Working Pap. 704.
9 pp.
Hern, S. C.,
V.
W. Lambou, L. R. Williams, and W. D. Taylor.
1981.
Modifica-
tions of methods predicting trophic state of lakes:
adjustment of models
to account for the biological manifestations of nutrients.
U.S. Environ.
Protection Agency.
EPA-600/3/-81-001.
38 pp.
Herrington, R. B., and D.
K.
Dunham.
fish
habitat characteristics of
mountain
Forest
and
Range
Exp.
12 pp.
1967.
A technique for sampling general
streams.
U.S.D.A.,
For.
Serv.,
Inter-
Stn.,
Ogden,
UT.
Res.
Pap.
INT
41.
Hokanson, K. E. F.
1977.
Temperature requirements of some percids and adapta-
tions
to
the
seasonal
temperature
cycle.
J.
Fish.
Res.
Board
Can.
34:1524-1550.
Holling, C. S.
1978.
Adaptive environmental assessment and management.
John
Wiley and Sons, NY.
377 pp.
Hutchinson,
G.
E.
1938.
On
the
relation
between
oxygen deficit
and
the
productivity and typology of lakes.
Int. Rev. Gesamten Hydrobol. Hydrogr.
36:336-355.
11 'ina, L. K., and N. A. Gordeyev.
1970.
Dynamics of the reproductive condi-
tions of phytophilous fishes at different stages in reservoir formation.
J. Ichthyol. 10:282-285.
Imboden, D.
1974.
Phosphorus model of lake eutrophication.
Limnol. Oceanogr.
19:297-304.
A.49


Jenkins,
R. M.
1982.
The morphoedaphic index and reservoir fish production.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc.
111:133-140.
Jones,
J.
R.,
and
R.
W.
Bachmann.
chlorophyll
levels
in
lakes.
48:2176-2182.
1976.
Prediction
of
phosphorus
and
J.
Water
Pollut.
Control
Federation
Keup, L. E.
1968.
Phosphorus in flowing waters.
Water Res. 2:373-386.
Kittrell,
F. W.
1959.
Effects of impoundments on dissolved oxygen
resources.
Sewage and Industrial Wastes 31:1065-1078.
Kothandaraman,
V.
1972.
Air-water
temperature
relationship
in
Illinois
River.
Water Resour. Bull. 8:38-45.
Kothandaraman,
V.,
and R. L. Evans.
1970.
Annual
temperature variations
in
an impoundment in central Illinois.
J. Am. Water Works Assoc. 62:639-642.
Lambou,
V. W.,
L. R. Williams,
S. C. Hern,
R. W. Thomas,
and
J. D. Bliss.
1976.
Prediction of phytoplankton productivity in
lakes.
Pages 696-700
In W. R. Ott (ed.).
Environmental
modeling and simulation.
Proc. of an
U.S.
Environ. Protection Agency Conf. April 19-22, 1976.
Cincinnati,
OH.
EPA 600/9-76-016.
Larsen,
D. P.,
and
H.
T.
Mercier.
1976.
Phosphorus
retention
capacity of
lakes.
J. Fish. Res. Board Can. 33:1742-1750.
Lasenby,
D. C.
1975.
Development of oxygen deficits in
14 southern
Ontario
lakes.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 20:993-999.
Laythe ,
L.
L.
1958.
A progress
report
on
the air
and water temperature
studies
for
1957,
Middle
Snake
River
Drainage.
U.S.D.l.
Fish
Wildl.
Serv., Portland, OR.
Leidy,
G. R.,
and
R. M. Jenkins.
1977.
The development
ments
and
population
rate coefficients
for
use
in
mode 1i ng.
Contract
Report Y-77-1,
prepared
for
Engineers, U.S. Army, Washington, DC.
72 pp.
of fishery compart-
reservoi r
ecosystem
Offi ce,
Chief
of
Levins,
R.
1966.
The strategy of model building
in
population
biology.
Am.
Sci. 54(4):421-431.
Lind, o. T.
1979.
Handbook of
common
methods
in
Limnology.
2nd edition.
C. V. Mosby Company, St. Louis, MO.
199 pp.
Lorenzen,
M. W., D. J. Smith, and L. V. Kimmel.
1976.
A long term phosphorus
model
for
lakes:
application
to
Lake
Washington.
Pages 75-92
in
R. P. Canale (ed.).
Modeling biochemical processes in aquatic
ecosystem~
Ann Arbor Sci. Publ., Ann Arbor, MI.
A.50


Lotspeich,
F. B.,
and
F. H. Everest.
1981.
A new method for reporting and
interpreting
textural
composition
of
spawning
gravel.
U.S.D.A.
For.
Serv.,
Pacific
Northwest
Forest
and
Range
Exp.
Sta.
Research
Note
PNW-369.
11 pp.
Loucks,
O. L.,
and
V. Watson.
1978.
The
use
of
models
to
study
wetland
regulation
of
nutrient
loading
to
Lake
Mendota.
Pages 242-252
in
C. F. DeWitt
and
E. Soloway
(eds).
Wetlands:
ecology,
values,
and
impacts.
Inst. Environ. Studies, Univ. Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
Mangan, J.
W.
1946.
Temperatures
of
natural waters
in
Pennsylvania.
Penn.
Dept. Forests and Waters.
222 pp.
McCombie, A. M.
1959.
Some relations between air temperature and the surface
water temperatures of lakes.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 4:252-258.
McConnell,
W. J.,
E. P. Bergersen,
and
K.
L. Williamson.
1982.
Habitat
suitability index models:
A low effort system for planned coolwater and
coldwater
reservoirs.
U.S.D.!.
Fish
and
Wildlife
Service.
FWS/OBS-82/10.3.
47 pp.
McMahon, T. E.
1982.
Habitat suitability index models:
Creek chub.
U.S.D.l.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-82/10.4.
23 pp.
McMahon,
T. E.,
and J.
W. Terrell.
1982.
Habitat suitability index models:
Channel catfish.
U.S.D.l.
Fish
and Wildlife
Service.
FWS/OBS-82/l0.2.
29 pp.
Milhous,
R. T.,
D. L. Wegner,
and
T. Waddle.
1981.
physical
habitat
simulation
system.
U.S.D.l.
FWS/OBS-81/43.
n.p.
User's
guide
to
the
Fi sh
Wildl.
Serv.
Moore,
A. M.
1964.
Oregon streams.
Correlation
and
analysis
of water-temperature data for
U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap. 501-0:185-189.
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration.
1974.
Climates
of
the
States.
Vol.
I, Eastern States; Vol. II, Western States including Alaska
and Hawaii.
Water Information Center, Inc., Port Washington, NY.
975 pp.
National
Oceanic
and
Atmospheric
Administration.
1978.
Climates
of
the
States, with current tables of normals 1941-1970 and means and extremes
to
1975.
James A. Ruffner,
compo
Vol. I,
Alabama-Montana;
Vol. 2,
Nebraska-Wyoming,
Puerto
Rico,
and
U.S.
Virgin
Islands.
Gale
Research
Company, Detroit, MI.
Newcombe,
C.
1981.
A procedure
to
estimate
changes
in
fish
populations
caused
by
changes
in
stream
discharge.
Trans.
Am.
Fish.
Soc.
110(3) :382-390.
Nielson, L. J.
1967.
Evaluation of pre-impoundment conditions for prediction
of
stored water quality.
Pages
153-168
in
Reservoi r fi shery resources
symposium.
Southern Div., Am. Fish. Soc., Washington, DC.
569 pp.
A.51


O·Connor, J. S.,
and B. C. Patten.
1967.
Mathematical
models
of
plankton
producti vi ty.
Pages 207-228
in
Reservoi r
fi shery
resources
symposium.
Southern Div., Am. Fish. Soc.
Washington, DC.
569 pp.
Paulet, M., H. Kohnke, and L. J. Lund.
1972.
sedimentation:
1. Effect
of
watershed
Quality 1:146-150.
An interpretation of reservoir
characteristics.
J.
Environ.
Pauszek,
F. H.
1972.
Water temperature data acquisition activities
in
the
United States.
U.S. Dept. Int., Geol. Surv., Water Resour.
Invest. 2-72.
47 pp.
Raphael, J.
M.
1962.
Prediction of
temperatures
in
rivers
and reservoirs.
J. Power Div., Proc. Am. Soc. Civil Eng. 88:157-181.
Rawson, J.
1970.
Reconnnaisance of water temperatures of selected streams in
southeastern Texas.
Texas Water Development Board Rep.
105.
Austin,
TX.
12 pp.
Rigler,
F. H.
1982.
The relation between fisheries management and limnology.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 111:121-132.
Robbins,
C. R.,
R.
M. Bailey,
C. E. Bond,
J.
R. Brooker,
E. A. Lachner,
R.
N. Lea, and W. B. Scott.
1980.
A list of common and scientific names
of fishes
from the United States and Canada.
4th
Edition.
Am.
Fish.
Soc., Special Publ. 12.
174 pp.
Romesburg,
C.
1981.
Wildlife
science:
gaining
reliable
knowledge.
J.
Wildl. Manage. 45(2):293-313.
Ryan, P. J.,
and D. F. Harleman.
1971.
Prediction of
the
annual
cycle
of
temperature changes in a stratified lake or reservoir: mathematical model
and user's manual.
Mass. Inst. Tech. Dept.
Civil
Eng., Ralph M.
Parsons
Laboratory for Water Resources and Hydrodynamics.
Cambridge,
MA.
Tech.
Rep. 137.
132 pp.
Sakamoto,
M.
Japanese
62:1-28.
1966.
Primary
production
by phytoplankton
community
in
some
lakes
and
its
dependence
on
lake
depth.
Arch.
Hydrobiol.
Schindler, D.
W.
1971.
A hypothesis to explain differences and similarities
among
lakes
in
the
Experimental
Lakes Area,
Northwestern Ontario.
J.
Fish. Res. Board Can. 28:295-301.
1977.
Evaluation of phosphorus limitation in lakes.
Science
195:260-262.
Sette,
O.
E.
1940.
Appendix B.
Probable temperatures of water to be stored
above Shasta Dam.
Pages 165-173 in
H. A.
Hanson, O.
R.
Smith, and P. R.
Needham (eds.).
An investigation-of fish salvage problems in relation to
Shasta Dam.
U.S. Bur. Fish. Special Sci. Rep. 10.
A.52


Snodgrass,
W. J.,
and C. R. O'Melia.
1975.
Predictive model
for
phosphorus
in lakes.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 9:937-944.
States, J. B.,
P. T. Haug, T. G. Shoemaker, L. W.
Reed, and E. B. Reed.
1978.
A systems approach to ecological baseline studies.
U.S.D.!.
Fish Wildl.
Serv.
FWS/OBS-78/21.
353 pp.
Straskraba,
M.
1973.
Limnological
basis
for modeling reservoir ecosystems.
Pages
517-535
in
W. C.
Ackermann,
G. E.
White,
and
E. B.
Worthington
(eds.).
Man-made lakes:
their problems and environmental effects.
Am.
Geophys. Union, Washington, DC. Geophys. Monogr. 17.
Straskraba,
M.,
and
P. Javornicky.
1973.
Limnology
of
two
re-regulation
reservoi rs
in
Czechoslovakia.
Pages 249-316
in
J. Hrbacek
and
M. Straskraba.
Hydrobiological
studies,
Vol.
2.
Academia
Publishing
House of the Czechoslovakian Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czechoslovakia.
Streeter,
H. W., and E. B. Phelps.
1925.
A study of the pollution and natural
purification of the Ohio River.
III. Factors concerned in
the phenomena
of oxidation and reaeration.
U.S. Public Health Servo Bull. 146.
759 pp.
Sylvester,
R.
O.
1957.
Research
and
investigation
of the quality of the
water
of
the
Col umbi a
River
and
effects
on
the
fi sheri es
resources.
U.S.D.I. Fish Wildl. Servo Contract 14-17-008-2419.
Final Rep.
Tapp, J. S.
1976.
Comparison
of
eutrophication
models.
Pages 50-56
in
W.
R. Ott (ed.).
Environmental
modeling
and
simulation.
Proc.
of
U.S":"
Environ.
Protection Agency Conf. April 19-22, 1976.
Cincinnati,OH.
EPA
600/9-76/016.
Tennessee
Va 11 ey Authority.
1976.
Water
temperature
predi cti on
model
for
deep reservoirs.
Div. Water Control Planning,
Tennesse~ Valley Authority,
Knoxville, TN.
119 pp.
Twenhofel,
W.
H.
1961.
Treatise
on sedimentation.
Vol.!.
Dover
Publica-
tions, NY.
460 pp (cited in Benson 1980).
U.S.
Army
Corps
of
Engineers.
1978.
Water
quality
for
river-reservoir
systems:
computer
program description.
U.S.
Army
Corps
of
Engineers,
Hydrologic Engineering Center.
Draft rep.
279 pp. plus appendices.
U.S.
Army
Corps
of
Engineers.
1980.
Thermal
simulation
of
lakes.
Users
manua1,
program numbers 722-F5-E1010 and 722-F5-El011.
U.S.
Army
Corps
of Engineers Hydrologic Engineering Center.
n.p.
tions catalog.
95616.
21 pp.
1981.
The Hydrologic Engineering Center publica-
Hydrologic Engineering Center, 609 Second St.,
Davis,
CA.
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
1980a.
Habitat Evaluation Procedures (HEP).
ESM 102.
U.S.D.!. Fish Wildl. Serv., Div. Eccil. Servo
n.p.
A.53


1980b.
Habitat
as
a
basis
for
environmental
assessment.
ESM 101.
U.S.D.!. Fish Wildl. Serv., Div. Ecol. Servo
n.p •
1981.
Standards
for
the deve 1opment of Habitat Suitabil ity
Index
models.
103
ESM.
U.S.D.!.
Fish
Wildl.
Serv.,
Div.
Ecol.
Servo
n. p.
Vollenweider,
R.
A.
1969.
Stoffbi 1anz
von
Seen.
concerning the budget
(English summary).
Moglichkeiten
und
Grenzen elementarer Modelle der
(Possibilities
and
limits
of
elementary
models
of substances in lakes).
Arch. Hydrobiol. 66:1-36.
1975.
Input-output
model s with
special
reference
to
the
phosphorus
1oadi ng
conception
of
1i mnology.
Schwei z.
Z.
Hydro1.
37:53-83.
Walker,
W. W.,
and
J.
Kuhner.
1979.
An
empirical
analysis
of
factors
controlling eutrophication
in midwestern
impoundments.
Pages 261-271
in
E.
E. Driver
and
W.
O. Wunderlich
(eds.).
Environmental
effects
of
hydraulic engineering works.
Proc.
of an
Int.
Symp., Sept. 12-14,1978.
Knoxville, TN.
Tennessee Valley Authority, Knoxville, TN.
494 pp.
Ward, J.
C.
1963.
Annual variation of stream water temperature.
J.
Sanitary
Eng. Div., Proc. Am. Soc. Civil Eng. 89:1-16.
Watt,
K. E.
F.
1962.
Use
of
mathematics
in
population
ecology.
Ann.
Rev.
Entomol. 7:243-260.
Wetzel, R. G.
1975.
Limnology.
W.
B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
743
pp.
Whitaker,
G.
L.
1971.
Periodic water- and air-temperature records
for
Utah
streams,
1966-70.
Utah Dept. Nat.
Resour., Water Rights Div., Basic-Data
Release 22.
423 pp.
(Cited in Pauszek 1972).
Wil son,
L.
R.
1935.
Lake deve 1opment and plant success i on
in
Vil as
County,
Wisconsin.
Ecol. Monogr. 5:207-247.
Woodward,
T.
H.
1970.
Summary of data
on
temperature
of
streams
in
North
Carolina,1943-67.
U.S.D.!., Geol. Surv. Water Supply Pap.
189A.
39 pp.
(Cited in Pauszek 1972).
Wunderlich,
W. 0.,
and
R.
A.
Elder.
1967.
The mechanics of stratified flow
in
reservoirs.
Pages
56-68
in
Reservoir
fishery
resources
symposium.
Southern Div., Am. Fish. Soc., Washington, DC.
569 pp.
Zuboy,
J.
R.
1981.
A new tool
for fishery managers:
the Delphi
technique.
N. Am. J. Fish. Manage. 1(1):55-59.
A.54


50272 ·'01
REPORT DOCUMENTATION
;.l ... REfIORT NO.
PAGE
i
FWSjOBS-82jlO.A
12-
I
11. Recioient's Ace..sion No.
11. C4ntrac:t(C) or GrantlG) No.
4. Title and Subtitle
••
5. "eooft 0...
Habitat Suitability Index Models:
Appendix A.
Gu,del,nes For
September 1982
Riverine And Lacustrine Applications Of Fish HSI Models With The
I~
. Habi ta t Eva1ua ti on Procedures
9. Perlo""in. O,..anintion Name and Address
Habitat Eva1uat, on Procedures Group 110. Proiec:t/Taak/Worlc Unit No.
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, CO
80526
12- SllOn"orinc Or.anizatton Name and Add,,"s
15. Suool ....entary NotH
·11. Abstrae:t (Wmit 200 wOrdSI
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washi nc ton ,
DC
20240
I 11. TYDe 0' Reooft & Period Covered
I
I
This publication provides general guidelines in the field application of aquatic
abitat Suitability Index (HSI) models and reviews methods for predicting future
Values for selected model variables.
These models are used with the Habitat
Evaluation Procedures (HEP).
17. Oocument Analysis
a. OneMotors
Aquatic biology
Fishes
Mathematical models
Ri vers
Lakes
Habitat evaluation
Habitat Evaluation Procedures (HEP)
Field guidelines
c. COSATI Field/Grouo
AvaIlabilitY Statement
RELEASE UNLIMITED
Habitat Suitability Index (HSI)
19. SecuritY Class (This Reoortl
UNCLASS IFIED
ZOo Securit'[ Class (This Pacel
UNCLASSIFIED
21.
No. of Pac..
ii - v +54pp
: 22.
Pnc:.
(SH ANSI-Z39.181
See Instrllctlons on
~e..erse
'it u.s. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1982-0-580-771/448
OPTIONAL FORM 272 (4-771
(FO"".,fy NTIS-3S1
Oepartm.nt of Commeree


LEGEND
,
"
1·
~
Headquart.,.· Ot1I~of Biological
services, Washington, D.C.
National Coastal Ecotyatems Team,
Slidell, La.
0'
W..tsm Energy and Land U..Team,
Fort Collins, Co.
Regional Offices
" '
'. l·
••
.-
.....).~••
t
u.s. FISH AND WlLDLIFE SERVICE
REGIONAL OFFICES'
REGION 1
Regional Director
U.S. Fishand Wildlife Service
lloyd Five Hundred Buildlnj, Suite 1692
500 N.E. Mu)tnomahStreet
Portland, Oregon 97232
REGION 2
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
P.O.Box 1306
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
,
", .;" Ii'"
REGIQ}'l.4,>,
_:' ,,' Regional E>irector
"
'
',l],.S.'FIs'handWiJdlife serVice
,RichardifR~sstnBuilding
. 7SSprin& Street, &W.
A~larit,a,~or8,ia 303,03
REGION S
, ,"R'8gio~ Di~~tor ;', :-,
','U.S. Ftsh,andW,i1d~~Servk:e
,
.One Gateway ,C~Jer,
':
, Newton Corner,~~~tiusetts021 S8
<
,
•
REGION 7
Regional Director
U.s. Fish and WUdU(e service
1011 E. Tudor Road
Anchorap. Alaska 99503
REGION 3
RelionaJ Director
u.s. Fishand Wildlife ServiCe
FederalBuilding, Fort Snelling
Twin Cities,Minnesota 55J II
REGiON 6
, .
Regional Director
,U.S. Fishanrl WlidJife Service
P.O.-BoX'25486
Denve.tP~deJar~~l1ter
Denver•.()olorado 80225


l'~S.
"~'H A WU.Dl.In:
N£RVlCt:
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR ~
u.s. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
~
"' ..... T .. •
As the Nation"
princlpal conservation alency, the Department of the Interior h•• respon-
sibility for most of our .nationally owned public lands and natural resources. This Includes
fostering the wisest use of our land and wlter resourCft. proteCting our filh and wildlife.
preserving tiu~envlronmental and cultural values of our national parks and hlstorlcel places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life throulh outdoor reereetion. The Department as-
sesses our eneraY and mineral resources and works to assure that their development is in
the best interests of all our people. The Department also has a major responsibility for
American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. administration.
