--- 
source: 2007-2.pdf
--- 

 
       
The Case for River Otter Restoration  
in New Mexico 
A Report to the River Otter Working Group 
 
Melissa Savage and Jon Klingel 
The Four Corners Institute 
Santa Fe, New Mexico 
 
 
     
 
 
Bring back the otter 
 
 
The river otter dives in a deep clear pool in the stream, a long line of bubbles 
rising to the surface as she expertly chases a shimmering catfish.  On the bank, two otter 
cubs roll and tumble in the willow thickets.  In this otter family, only the cubs were born 
in this place.  The mother was part of a river otter restoration project to return these 
mammals to places that they inhabited before trapping and other pressures caused their 
extirpation.  In many states where otters survived or where restoration programs have 
been initiated, this scene is common along streams and rivers, swamps and wetlands.   
 
For thousands of years, river otters were a part of the natural environment of what 
is now New Mexico.  As a top predator, the animal at the top of the food chain, otters 
play an important role in the balance of prey populations in aquatic ecosystems of rivers 
and streams.  They thrive where there is clean water, abundant food, and protected places 
to den and rest.   
 
But river otters probably no longer live in New Mexico.  There has been no 
confirmed evidence of otters in the state since 1953.  Since the animal is large and active, 
and there is extensive human use of New Mexico’s rivers, it is likely that if there were 
any otter remaining in the state, they would have been noticed during the past fifty years.  
River otters have now been restored to every state from which they were extirpated 
except New Mexico (Raesley 2001).  The time has come to bring the river otter back to 
the rivers and streams of New Mexico.      
 
Otters in New Mexico 


 
2
 
The historical distribution and abundance of river otters in the Southwest is 
largely unknown.  Otters were abundant enough in the rivers and streams of New Mexico 
to have been documented many times in the diaries and journals of early travelers in the 
region. Reliable reports in historical documents of river otter in New Mexico exist for the 
upper and middle Rio Grande, and the Mora, Gila, and Canadian River drainages 
(Polechla 2000).  Other documents indicate that otters possibly occupied the San Juan 
River drainage in northwestern New Mexico (Polechla 2000).  
 
The value of beaver pelts throughout the 19th century and the popularity of 
trapping beaver led to trapping of river otter as well.  So heavily were these animals 
trapped in New Mexico that even the Mexican authorities took notice.  In 1838 the 
departmental junta of Chihuahua acted to protect both beaver and river otter along the 
Rio Grande by declaring a six year moratorium on trapping of the two species (deBuys 
1985).  deBuys called this act “one of the first conservation measures in the North 
American West” (1985). 
 
Despite this early attempt to protect furbearers, trapping pressure on them 
continued throughout the 1800s.  By 1890, beaver were regarded as “practically extinct” 
in New Mexico (Huey 1956).  The season on beaver trapping was closed in 1897.  The 
less abundant river otter populations were even more depleted than those of beaver.  By 
the 1950s, declining beaver pelt prices combined with efforts to recover the population, 
including transplants and closed trapping seasons, made a beaver comeback possible 
(Polechla 2000).  But the damage to the river otter populations was done.  River otters 
apparently had declined to a point of no return.   
 
Over-trapping of otters for their pelts had the earliest and biggest impacts on river 
otter populations, but other changes in the environment continued to take a toll.  Water 
quality in the state declined throughout the 20th century, with soil erosion and pollution 
resulting from overgrazing, timber cutting and mining in some areas.  Water quantity in 
rivers also dropped in many areas because of agriculture and water development.  
 
The last definite documented evidence of a river otter in New Mexico came in 
1953 in the Gila River.  ‘Shorty’ Lyon, a government trapper, found a dead otter in a 
beaver trap he had set on the Gila River southeast of the town of Cliff.  This animal 
provided the first and last preserved physical evidence of the species in New Mexico.  
Since then, there have been unverified sightings, but no concrete evidence of otter 
occupation (Polechla 2000).  Bailey’s 1931 report of river otters in the upper Rio Grande 
is considered the last reliable evidence for the entire river. 
 
No river otter presence has been confirmed in New Mexico since 1953.  While the 
possibility exists that there may be a few remaining animals, it is remote.  Considering 
the extroverted antics of otters and the number of people near streams for fishing and 
rafting in the state, it is doubtful that there are otter populations that have escaped 
detection.  Polechla (2000) states, “Either the river otter has a remnant population so 
small that it can not be detected by the methods used or the population is now 


 
3
extirpated.”  Systematic surveys will be needed to document the presence or absence of 
any relict populations and to confirm the status of river otters in the state. 
 
The Southwestern river otter 
 
The species that inhabits the U.S. and Canada is the North American river otter,  
Lontra canadensis.  The original populations of the river otter in the Southwest may have 
been a subspecies, Lontra canadensis sonora.  A subspecies is equivalent to a “race”, 
which is a population that has unique characteristics that are specifically attuned to the 
local environment.  Southwestern otter populations were never very abundant, since 
water is sparse, and only a few specimens from the region have been available for 
comparison with specimens from elsewhere across the continent. 
 
Based on three otter specimens, all from Arizona, a designation of the subspecies 
sonora, the Southwestern river otter, was made in 1898 (MacDonald 2002).  The extent 
of the original distribution of the proposed subspecies in the region is unclear.  The 
validity of a southwestern subspecies, however, has been questioned based on the small 
number of specimens from the area.  In the late 1980s, when L. c. sonora was considered 
for endangered status, Bates (1988) determined that there was insufficient evidence to 
support the existence of a separate subspecies.  The taxonomic validity of the subspecies 
designation is currently being tested using DNA analyses on the specimen collected from 
the Gila River.  The case has not yet been convincingly made that the New Mexican otter 
is a valid subspecies.   
 
River otters are considered extirpated by the New Mexico Department of Game 
and Fish.  If surveys in the state were to locate any remaining native animals, the status of 
river otters would likely change to endangered, and the goals and implementation of a 
restoration plan would likewise change.  Until actual evidence of otter occurrence is 
produced, however, the existence of otters in the state remains speculative (Polechla 
2000) 
 
River Otter Ecology 
 
The river otter is a swift and strong semi-aquatic predator that thrives wherever 
there is  enough clean water and an adequate food base.  Otters use water for hunting for 
food, cavorting, traveling,  and as a refuge from danger.  Riparian ecosystems, where 
willows and other wetland and streamside plants grow, make good homes for otters, 
whether along desert streams or mountain freshets.  Their lithe, streamlined shape, 
powerful tails, and webbed feet make them expert swimmers and divers.  Dense, glossy 
brown fur, with longer guard hairs, keep them warm and dry in icy winter waters.  They 
are primarily active in the day, and can sometimes be seen playing and hunting in the 
morning and late afternoon. 
 
Otters thrive in habitat with slow-moving water and deep pools, good riparian 
vegetation, and abundant fish or crayfish.  They can tolerate relatively low water flow, 
perhaps as little as 10 cubic feet per second, if other important habitat conditions are 


 
4
good, such as the presence of pools, good water depth, ice-free stretches in winter, and 
access to shoreline (Fitzgerald et al. 1994).  
 
Otters have broad tastes, and eat a wide variety of fare.  Fish are usually the 
primary food item in the otter diet, but they love crayfish, which can comprise the 
majority of the otter diet where abundant.  They also may occasionally eat frogs, insects, 
and aquatic birds (Fitzgerald et al. 1994).  Slow-swimming fish, such as carp, chub, and 
catfish, are more commonly eaten than faster fish such as trout (Chapman and Feldhamer 
1982, Fitzgerald et al. 1994).  Otters are successful hunters even in seasonally turbid 
waters, such as the Dolores River in Colorado (Fitzgerald et al. 1994). 
 
On the banks of their home streams, river otters depend on plant communities to 
provide protection.  Riparian vegetation, such as willow thickets, cottonwood trees, tree 
root tangles, downed logs and other debris, rushes and cattails, even non-native plants 
such as Russian olive and Siberian elm trees, provide places for hiding and denning.  
Dense brush near streams is used in spring to protect the young from predators.  Branches 
and other plants that hang over streams shade the water, and produce cooler water 
temperatures that may be favored by fish on hot summer days (Herreman and Ben-David 
2002).  A healthy riparian vegetation community is essential for cover when otters are on 
the bank.  In return, the otter inadvertently fertilizes streamside plant communities by 
depositing nitrogen from fish in their scat (Ben-David, cited in Crait 2002). 
 
Otters are often found in beaver country.  The river otter shares its river habitat 
with raccoon and muskrat as well (Polechla 2000), but it is the presence of beavers that is 
uniquely helpful for otters’ lifestyle.  By damming streams, beaver create the deep, fish-
rich pools that otters prefer for fishing.  Pools also provide sanctuary for otter when other 
waters dry up seasonally.  Otters also use abandoned beaver dens, especially abandoned 
lodges and dens carved into river banks.  Beavers increase the potential for otter success 
by increasing feeding and denning sites.  As beaver populations have rebounded in the 
state, they have restored high-quality otter habitat. 
 
There are few predators on river otter in the water, but they are more vulnerable 
away from the water, where they move in a less fluid, bobbing way.  On dry land, bobcat, 
coyotes, cougars, foxes, and dogs have been known to kill otters (Chapman and 
Feldhamer 1982).  Still, otters are remarkably strong and agile for their weight, and can 
muster a potent defense.  In areas of high human density, otters are primarily killed by 
dogs and highway traffic (Beck, pers. comm.). 
 
 
Otters are social animals, and often remain in family groups that play and hunt 
together.  They breed in early spring, with litters averaging 2 to 4 pups.  Cubs begin to try 
the water at around 6 weeks, but must be coaxed into the water and helped to learn to 
swim by their mothers Chapman and Feldhamer1982).  Cubs and mothers often stay 
together for over a year (Melquist and Hornocker 1983).   
 
Playfulness is a well-known and appreciated characteristic of river otters.  Otter 
groups can often be seen frolicking and cartwheeling underwater,  apparently for the 
sheer pleasure of it.  Tobogganing down slippery banks and on snow slopes on their 


 
5
bellies is a famous otter pastime.  Perhaps no other mammal seems to us to play  as 
intently and as joyfully as the river otter. 
 
 
Restoration in other states  
 
By 1980, North American river otters had disappeared from 11 states, and were in 
severe decline in 9 other states (Raesley 2001).  During that decade, however, a shift 
occurred in management philosophy, and managing for sustainable river otter populations 
became the goal in many states.  Twenty-one states implemented otter restoration 
programs between 1974 and 1998 (Raesley 2001).  In some of these states, there were no 
remaining river otters when the restoration programs were initiated, but in most, there 
were small populations of otters still present when releases were made (Raesley 2001).  
Otters have also been reintroduced on Santee Sioux tribal land in South Dakota (Raesley 
2001).  
   
River otters are highly mobile and when reintroduced into suitable habitat, are 
often highly successful in repopulating adjacent stretches of river.  They are effective 
pioneers, and readily move into parts of rivers where habitat is good.  They are even 
capable of traveling overland for some distance, to disperse into other watersheds.  
 
 Perhaps the most successful river otter restoration program so far in the United 
States has been in Missouri, where rivers and streams are abundant.  A restoration 
program in the 1980s and early 1990s resulted in an otter population of over 11,000 
animals by 1999 (Chambers 2001).  Crayfish have dominated the diet of Missouri otters 
in summer, and fish in winter, and otter predation may have decreased warm-water game 
fish populations in smaller streams in the Ozarks (Kruse, pers. comm.).  Fortunately, 
warm-water fish in New Mexico are found primarily in reservoirs, which otters avoid 
because of the lack of vegetation cover. 
 
In the Southwest, Colorado, Arizona, and Utah have had otter restoration 
programs.  In Colorado, between 1976 and 1992,  otters were reintroduced into the 
headwaters of the Colorado River in Rocky Mountain National Park, and into the 
Dolores, Gunnison and Piedra Rivers, where they survived and reproduced (Fitzgerald et 
al. 1994).  Studies conducted in the mid-1990s in Rocky Mountain National Park suggest 
that otter populations there are now at carrying capacity—the highest possible number of 
otters given the amount of food and habitat available .  More intensive surveys, 
conducted in 2001, estimated that there were 18 otters along the Colorado River within 
the boundaries of the Rocky Mountain National Park (Herreman and Ben-David 2002).  
 
Otters were successfully introduced into the Verde River drainage in Arizona by 
the Arizona Game and Fish Department, through a reintroduction from 1981 to 1983.  A 
self-sustaining population now exists in the Verde River watershed (Van Pelt, pers. 
comm.).  Otters were also released into the Green River in Utah between 1989 and 1990 
(MacDonald 2002), and there is now a viable population in the Green River above and 
below Flaming Gorge Dam (Haschlke and Ben-David 2002). 
 
  
Otters for these southwestern restorations were obtained from widely disparate 


 
6
places.  Colorado used otters from a number of states, primarily from Oregon, Minnesota, 
and Wisconsin, but also from Alaska, Washington, California and Newfoundland.  
Arizona released otters originating in Louisiana.  The otters released into southwestern 
states, thus, have not been the proposed subspecies L. c. sonora.    
 
Issues of Concern 
 
 
The river otter shares a love of fish with anglers.  Sport fishermen may be 
concerned that the otter would compete with them for fish, and the otter has sometimes 
been erroneously blamed for the depletion of game fish, especially trout.  Scientific 
studies have demonstrated that the bulk of otter diet is nongame fish species (Tesky 
1993).  Otters take the most leisurely hunting approach, eating the most easily captured 
fish.  The main stay of otter diet is slow-moving nongame fish such as suckers and carp 
with occasional faster fish (Melquist and Dronkert 1987).  When available, otter will eat a 
diet almost entirely composed of crayfish (Chambers 2001).  Where they have been 
reintroduced into the Dolores River in Colorado, for example, otters have made extensive 
use of crayfish (Fitzgerald et al. 1994).  In fact, river otters are considered beneficial to 
game fish in many circumstances, since they eat crayfish and nongame fish that compete 
with game fish (Chapman and Feldhamer 1982, Tesky 1993). 
 
The protection of endangered fish populations that inhabit portions of the state’s 
rivers is a priority.  However, two species of concern, the Rio Grande cutthroat and the 
Gila trout, are fish that typically inhabit the headwaters of streams and rivers (Peroz, pers. 
comm., Propst, pers. comm.).  The best otter habitat, on the other hand, is downstream 
from the headwaters, where both water quantity and prey base are more abundant.  
Potential conflict between otters and spikedace and loach minnow is also unlikely 
because otters prefer to hunt in deep pools, and these fish inhabit shallow riffles (Propst, 
pers. comm.).  Any potential issues with other fish species of concern need to be 
considered and addressed. 
 
Another possible issue is that reintroduced otters might incidentally get caught in 
traps set for other mammals, particularly beaver.  Trappers need to be assured that the 
incidental trapping of an otter will not create problems for them, and that there will be a 
management policy in place to deal with this possibility.  However river segments 
proposed for otter restoration in New Mexico tend to be remote, such as the upper Gila 
River and Rio Grande gorge, where the potential for trapping conflict is low.  Accidental 
trapping of otter can also be reduced by the use of a new trap trigger that allows otters to 
swim through traps unharmed (Beck, pers. comm.). Fencing of fish hatcheries, now 
planned for facilities in the state as protection from other threats, would also prevent 
conflict with river otters. 
 
 
Will riparian plant communities need rehabilitation before river otter restoration?  
The answer to this question is that while otters need streamside cover, they have a wide 
tolerance for vegetation community type and condition.  Although they spend a lot of 
time out of the water, using river bank communities for denning and resting, almost any 
kind of continuous vegetation--willows, tall sedge, rose thickets, cattail sloughs, even 
exotic non-native plant species communities—provide adequate cover. 


 
7
 
Benefits of river otter restoration 
 
 
The return of the river otter to New Mexico rivers means we will once again share 
our incomparable natural home again with this rare and delightful animal.  Locals and 
visitors taking a quiet evening stroll by the banks of the Rio Grande might be surprised 
and enlivened by the splashing of a family of otters. 
 
 
The presence of river otter in our southwestern streams will help restore the 
biological balance of our rivers.  Crayfish are not native to any of our waterways from the 
Pecos River west.  Crayfish populations, for example, have become established in the Rio 
Grande, the San Juan, Gila and San Francisco Rivers to the detriment of native fish and 
insect populations.  Crayfish harm the natural balance of river faunas by preying on both 
young fish and fish eggs, and other wildlife, such as Chiricahua leopard frogs and 
newborn garter snakes (Fernandez and Rosen 1996, Childs 1999).  Where crayfish have 
been introduced to waterways of Arizona, flora and fauna have been devastated, and 
water turbidity and siltation have increased (Fernandez and Rosen 1996).   
 
Otters also tend to eat the slower, more abundant fish species, which in the 
proposed restoration sites, are primarily non-native fish.  The white sucker, for example, 
a non-native fish in the upper Rio Grande, is the single most abundant fish in that stretch 
of river.  This undesirable non-native hybridizes with the native Rio Grande sucker, a 
Forest Service ”sensitive” species.  The most abundant fish species in the proposed 
restoration site in the upper and lower Gila River and San Francisco River, are non-native 
as well (Propst, pers. comm.).  In Missouri, restored otters were found to prey heavily on 
fish in winter and crayfish in summer (Hamilton, pers. comm.).  Otter predation on non-
native fish and crayfish populations will help create and maintain more natural conditions 
in aquatic populations.. 
 
The return of the river otter will mean different things to different people.  The 
fisherman may see a predator that can help restore a balance in the aquatic fauna by 
reducing the number of non-native fish and crayfish that prey on young native fish 
species.  River tour guides may see the addition of an elegant, playful animal that will 
delight and captivate their clients.  The otter is a furbearer, and if restoration efforts are 
very successful, the otter may in time offer a season to trappers.  The conservationist may 
see the return of a key ecological component of a healthy river.  The visitor may take 
away a cherished memory of an afternoon watching the antics of an otter family. 
 
Why river otter restoration now? 
 
This is an excellent time to initiate a river otter restoration program in New 
Mexico.  The decline of river otter populations in New Mexico was largely due to the 
effects of human activities in the past, mostly in the distant past.  Uncontrolled trapping 
no longer occurs here.  The boon compatriot of the otter, the beaver, is again busy in the 
waterways of the state damming pools and building dens.  Rivers are cleaner as pollution 
management improves, and overgrazing of grasslands and forests has declined.  Along 


 
8
the Rio Grande, and other streams and rivers of the state, riparian communities are being 
restored to healthier conditions and provide protection for other wildlife species. 
 
A river otter restoration program need not be a complicated task.  Animals for a 
restoration program are expected to be readily available from abundant populations in 
other states.  Otters would not need intensive management efforts where potential for 
conflict with humans is low.  Releases in other nearby states have usually consisted of 
one-time releases of a number of otters at one or more suitable sites, with relative low 
program costs.  
 
 
Potential otter habitat in the state includes rivers where there is enough water to 
provide adequate otter habitat, such as the upper Rio Grande, the San Juan River, and the 
Gila and San Francisco River drainages.  In addition, extensive stretches of those waters 
are protected by wilderness status, or land management by Forest Service and Bureau of 
Land Management or tribal governments.  Long continuous stretches of river otter habitat 
with an adequate water and food supply, exist in New Mexico. 
 
In those places where restoration is being considered, surveys need to be 
undertaken to identify the best possible otter habitat.  A survey of the upper Rio Grande 
has already been completed (Polechla 2000), which found that otter populations could 
indeed live in a long stretch of river from the state border to Espanola.  In Idaho, river 
otter densities were observed to be one otter per 1.7 to 3.7 river miles (Melquist and 
Hornocker 1983).  Using these density values, the approximately 265 river miles of 
suitable habitat within the proposed restoration sites in New Mexico might support an 
estimated 70 to 160 river otters. 
 
Much of the upper Rio Grande is a good river otter restoration location because it 
is protected from human disturbance by its remoteness and its deep canyon.  A 48-mile 
stretch of the Rio Grande was designated as a Wild and Scenic River in 1968, lending an 
additional level of protection to the area.  Thirty miles of the Chama River, whose 
confluence with the Rio Grande occurs at Espanola, also provide excellent otter habitat.  
The Gila and the San Francisco Rivers, in Southwestern New Mexico also appears to 
have good otter habitat.  Grazing pressure in this watershed has declined in recent years, 
and riparian areas and water quality are recovering.  The upper stem of the river is 
protected by wilderness status, while most of the middle and lower Gila River boxes are 
managed by Forest Service or Bureau of Land Management.  Since nonnative fish and 
crayfish dominate these systems (Propst, pers. comm.), otter presence may potentially 
contribute to the integrity of the aquatic ecosystem.  The San Juan River offers a high 
volume of water, a high density of non-native catfish and carp, which are detrimental to 
endangered fish recovery, and good riparian cover.  In addition, otters have been restored 
to the upper reaches of the San Juan River drainage in Colorado.  Most of the proposed 
restoration segment is remote and runs through Navajo tribal land.  Potential conflict with 
fish species of concern in the San Juan River is currently being assessed (Propst, pers. 
comm.).   
 
The decision to restore river otters to New Mexico rests with the State Game 
Commission, except on tribal lands.  The New Mexico Department of Game and Fish is 


 
9
the agency that would plan, implement, and manage a restoration program in the state.  
Although the responsibility for management of otters ultimately rests in the hands of the 
Department, the public may also be able to contribute to this program by volunteering to 
help with surveys and offer other kinds of support for a restoration program. 
 
 
A successful restoration of river otters to the state will depend not only on the 
biological factors, but also on a consensus among the people of the state that the return of 
river otters will benefit all.  A program such as this will need a broad consensus from 
many stakeholders, Native Americans, environmentalists and conservationists, fishermen, 
trappers, river runners, government agencies, river front landowners, scientists, tourists, 
and local community folks.  
 
River otters are making a remarkable comeback in many parts of their original 
range in the U.S.  They have proven to be highly adaptable and resilient survivors.  The 
establishment of this lively native animal into the wilder parts of the state can be a 
measure of our abilities to sustain the health and integrity of our aquatic and wetland 
communities.  With luck, the charismatic and playful river otter could soon be back in 
New Mexico, and back to stay.  
   
 
 
Literature cited 
 
Bailey, V.  1931.  Mammals of the Southwestern United States.  Dover Publication Inc.: NY, NY.    
 
Bates, B.  1988.  Reintroduction of river otter in Utah.  Utah Division of Wildlife Resources.  Unpublished 
Report. 
 
deBuys, W.  1985.  Enchantment and Exploitation: The Life and Hard Times of a New Mexico Mountain 
Range.  University of New Mexico Press: Albuquerque, NM. 
 
Chambers, G. D. 2001. The river otter in Missouri.  The River Otter Journal 10(2): 1, 3-4. 
 
Chapman, J.A. and G.A. Feldhamer. 1982. Wild Mammals of North America: Biology, Management and 
Economics.  Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 
Childs, M.  1999.  Literature review and field and laboratory studies of northern crayfish, Orconectes 
virilis, in Arizona.  Report to the Heritage Program, Arizona Game and Fish Department. 
 
Crait, J.  2002.  River otters, cutthroat trout, and their future in Yellowstone National Park.  The River Otter 
Journal 11(2): 1-3. 
 
Fernandez, P.J. and P.C. Rosen.  1996.  Effects of the introduced crayfish Orconectes virilis on native 
aquatic herptofauna in Arizona.  Final report IIPAM No. I94054, Arizona Game and Fish Department. 
 
Findley, J.S., A.H. Harris, D.E. Wilson, and C. Jones.  1975.  Mammals of New Mexico.  University of 
New Mexico Press. 
 
Fitzgerald, J. P., C. A. Meaney, and D. M. Armstrong.  1994.  Mammals of Colorado.  Denver Museum of 
Natural History and University Press of Colorado. 
 
Haschke, J. and M. Ben-David.  2002.  Row..row..row your boat, gently down ‘the Green.’  The River 
Otter Journal 11 (2): 10-11. 


 
10
  
Herreman, J. and M. Ben-David.  2002.  Population Survey for River Otters in Rocky Mountain National 
Park..  The River Otter Journal 11 (1): 10-11. 
 
Hoffmeister, D.F. 1986. Mammals of Arizona.  The University of Arizona Press. 
 
Huey, W.S. 1956.  New Mexico Beaver Management.  New Mexico Department of Game and Fish.  
Bulletin 4: 1-49. 
 
MacDonald, S. O.  2002.  Oughtabe Otters.  Carapace: 6 (2): 7. 
 
Melquist, W.E. and M.G. Hornocker.  1983.  Ecology of river otters in west central Idaho.  Wildlife 
Monographs 83: 1-60. 
 
Polechla, P.  2000.  Final Report: Ecology of the river otter and other wetland furbearers in the Upper Rio 
Grande.  Bureau of Land Management, Taos, NM. 
 
Ralls, K.  1990.  Reintroduction. Pages 20-21 in Otters: An action plant for their conservation.  P. Foster 
Turley, S. Macdonald, and C. Mason, eds.  Kelvyn Press: IL.  
 
Raesley, E.J. 2001.  Progress and status of river otter reintroduction projects in the United States.  Wildlife 
Society Bulletin 29(3): 856-862. 
 
Tesky, J.L. 1993.  Lutra canadensis.  In W.C. Fischer, complier.  The Fire Effects Information System.  
Missoula, MT.  USDA Forest Service Intermountain Research Station.   http://www.fs.fed.us/database/feis/ 
 
