--- 
source: 2007 000n-48.pdf
--- 

GENETIC FEASIBILITY STUDY FOR THE RE-INTRODUCTION OF OTTERS IN THE 
NETHERLANDS 
 
Hugh JANSMAN1, Louis VAN DE ZANDE2 &  R. BIJLSMA2 
 
1.  Alterra - Centre for Ecosystems, P.O. Box 47, NL-6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands   
email: HughJansman@wur.nl   
 2.  University of Groningen, Evolutionary Genetics, P.O. Box 149750, AA Haren Gn, The Netherlands 
email:  R.Bijlsma@biol.rug.nl  and  zandelpw@biol.rug.nl  
 
 
In 2002, the first Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) were re-introduced into The Netherlands. 
According to the IUCN guidelines for re-introductions (IUCN, 1995), an assessment should be 
made of the taxonomic status of individuals to be re-introduced and they should preferably be of 
the same subspecies or race as those that were extirpated. Major genetic differentiation is 
expected when populations are separated in isolated populations for which the local environments 
(habitat, climate, etc) differ. In such a case selection will most likely lead to genetic adaptation to 
the local situation after many generations. For example, Mediterranean otter populations have to 
cope with different survival aspects (e.g. dry rivers in summer) compared to northern otter 
populations (for example, frozen waters in winter time). Therefore, it is expected that 
Mediterranean otter populations differ genetically more from northern otter populations than UK 
otters from Scandinavian otters, although up to now no data are available to support this. 
In this study the taxonomic status was determined by analysing haplotype diversity of mtDNA 
(control region, CASSENS ET AL., 2000) and microsatellite variation (DALLAS AND PIERTNEY, 
1998) in several Eurasian otter populations in Europe. The study focussed on Belarus and Latvia 
as potential donor populations, as well as the otter breeding programme, represented by an A and 
B breeding lineage.  In addition, Dutch samples (museum and carcasses) as well as samples from 
Germany, Czech Republic, Sweden, UK, France, Spain and Israel were included in the study. 
In accordance with studies (CASSENS ET AL., 2000; MUCCI ET AL., 1999; DALLAS ET AL., 
2002; RANDI ET AL., 2003), low levels of mtDNA control region sequence variability were found, 
whereas microsatellite analysis revealed moderate to high values of allelic diversity and 
heterozygosity. If the samples of the breeding programme were excluded, the fixation index 
showed an overall FST-value of 0.12. For microsatellites this indicates little to moderate genetic 
differentiation. In otters from the B-lineage of the breeding programme, for which the origin of 
the ancestors is unknown, some uncommon, private, alleles were detected. The genetic cluster of 
the east German otters (the population that is most likely to reach the Dutch borders in the near 
future) almost completely overlaps the cluster of the Latvian and Belarussian otters (the 
populations selected as potential donor populations because of their availability and thriving 
status) meaning that there is little indication of genetic difference between them. This could be 
explained because of the more or less similar ecosystems, the large dispersal potential of the otter 
as well as the fact that a century ago the otter distribution extended from the Netherlands trough 
Germany and Poland to Latvia and Belarus. Because of the very low level of mtDNA variability 
in Eurasian otters in parts of Europe it is speculated that otters went historically through a major 
bottleneck after which they rapidly colonised the continent again (CASSENS ET AL., 2000). 
Altogether it was concluded that it is unlikely that outbreeding depression (by some 
termed “genetic pollution”) is to be expected if otters from the analysed European populations are 
used for the re-introduction of the otter in the Netherlands, as no distinct subpopulations could be 


detected in our investigation. The other European populations that have been analysed do not 
differ greatly from the former Dutch populations. However care should be taken when 
introducing otters from the B-lineage of the breeding programme. The results of this study are in 
preparation for submission. 
 
REFERENCES: 
CASSENS, I., TIEDEMANN, R., SUCHENTRUNK, F. & HARTLE, G.B. 2000. Mitochondrial DNA variation in the 
European otter (Lutra lutra) and the use of spatial autocorrelation analysis in conservation. Journal of Heredity, 91: 
31-35. 
DALLAS J.F. & PIERTNEY S.B. 1998. Microsatellite primers for the Eurasian otter. Molecular Ecology, 7: 1248-1251 
DALLAS, J.F., MARSHALL, F., PIERTNEY, S. B., BACON, P. J. & RACEY, P.A. 2002. Spatially restricted gene flow 
and reduced microsatellite polymorphism in the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) in Britain. Conservation Genetics, 3: 
p15-29 
IUCN.  1995. Guidelines for re-introductions:  http://www.iucn.org/themes/ssc/pubs/policy/reinte.htm 
MUCCI, N., PERTOLDI, C., MADSEN, A. B., LOESCHCKE, V. & RANDI, E. 1999. Extremely low mitochondrial DNA 
control-region sequence variation in the otter Lutra lutra population of Denmark. Heraditas, 130: 331-336. 
RANDI, E., DAVOLI, F., PIERPAOLI, M., PERTOLDI, C., MADSEN, A.B., & LOESCHKE, V. 2003. Genetic structure in 
otter (Lutra lutra) populations in Europe: implications for conservation. Animal Conservation, 6: 1-10 
 
This is a co-operative study between University of Groningen, Alterra and Stichting Otterstation Nederland, which 
was funded by the Prins Bernhard Fund. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
