--- 
source: 2007-15.pdf
--- 

Biological Services Program
FWSIOB$·82/10.11
FEBRUARY 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
MARTEN
Fish and Wildlife Service
u.s. Department of the Interior


The 8iolog1cal Serv1cts Program was establ1shed with1n the U.S. F1sh
..nd Wl1dl1h Servict to supply scientific iM4nnation and IRthodolog1e, on
key env1ronmental 1ssUes that
1~.ctf1sh and w1ldlife resourcls and their
$UPPQrting eoosystems.
The M1ssion of the program 1s as follOW$;
To strengthen the Fish and Wildlif~ Service in its role IS
• priNry source of informatiDn 01'1 national fish al'ld wild-
11ft resources. particularly in respect to enviro_ntal
impact assessm.nt.
•
To Olther, an-lyle, and p~esent information that will aid
decfsiOJllDlktrs in the htent1f1catian IJnd resolution of
problems associated with major changes in '.odand water
use.
•
To provia. better ecological information and evaluitfon .
for Department of the Interior develo·pment
pr9gr'Ms~ such
as those relating to energy development.
Info~t1on 4eveloped by the
B101o~fcal Serv1ces Program is intended
for
US~ in the planning and decisionmlking proC«55 to prevent or minimize
the 1mpact of devtlopment onf'i'ih and wl1dlife,
Research activities and
technical assistance services are based on an analysis of the issues, a
determination of the
dtcis1o~kers involved and their informat1on needs,
.nd an evaluat10n of the state of the .rt to identify information gaps
and to determine priorities,
Thts is • strategy that wfllensure that
the products produced .nd disseminated Ire timely and U$eful.
Projects have been initiated in tht following areas:
coal extraction
and convers tcn, power plants; geQtMn'\'lIl, mineral and oi1shale dtve1op-
·ment; water resource analys1s, including st"al1 alterations and western
water allocation; coastal ecosystems and Outer Continental Shelf develop-
mtnt, ano systems inventory, 1ncluding National wetland Inventory,
habitat claSlif1cltion and analysis, .nd 1nformation tran,fer.
The 8iological Services Program cOl'ls1sts of theOffiC. of 8iological
Services 1n Washington, D.C., which is responsible fol" overall planning and
I!l4n.~.Ieme"t; Katfonal Te&IllS,wh1ch prOVide the Program's central scientific
and technical expertise and arrange for contracting biological serv1cts
studies with states, universities, tt>nsu1t1ng finns, and others'; Regional
S'taff$, ·who provide. link "to problems at the o~rattng level, and·staffs at
c~rtain Fish and Wl1dl1fe Serv1ce research facilities, who conduct in-house
r~.arch studies.
.


sK
7? ~7 i
'I crt
... t.
-/',
-,
i~~',
(,,I
! (1
i i
,',-
~
. ,
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
MARTEN
by
Arthur W. Allen
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, CO 80526
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington, DC 20240
FWS/OBS-82/10.11
February 1982


This report should be cited as:
Allen, A.
W.
1982.
Habitat suitability index models:
Marten.
U.S.D.T.
Fish
and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-82/10.11.
9 pp.
i i


PREFACE
This document is part of the Habitat Suitability Index (HSI) Model Series
(FWS/OBS-82/10),
which provides habitat information useful for impact assess-
ment
and
habitat
management.
Several
types
of
habitat
information
are
provided.
The Habitat Use Information Section is largely constrained to those
data that can be used to derive quantitative relationships between key environ-
mental variables and habitat suitability.
The habitat use information provides
the foundation for HSI models that follow.
In addition, this same information
may be useful
in the development of other models more appropriate to specific
assessment or evaluation needs.
The HSI Model Section documents a habitat model and information pertinent
to its application.
The model synthesizes the habitat use information into a
framework appropriate for field application and is scaled to produce an index
value between 0.0 (unsuitable habitat) and 1.0 (optimum habitat).
The applica-
tion information includes descriptions of
the geographic ranges and seasonal
application of the model,
its current verification status,
and a listing of
model variables with recommended measurement techniques for each variable.
In essence, the model presented herein is a hypothesis of species-habitat
relationships and not a statement of
proven cause and effect relationships.
Results of model performance tests, when available, are referenced.
However,
models
that
have demonstrated reliability in specific situations may prove
unreliable in others.
For this reason,
feedback is encouraged from users of
this model concerning improvements and other suggestions that may increase the
utility and effectiveness of this habitat-based approach to fish and wildlife
planning.
Please send suggestions to:
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
2625 Redwing Road
Ft. Collins, CO
80526
iii


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge Tim Clark and Tom Campbell for their review of
this habitat model.
The cover of this document was illustrated by Jennifer
Shoemaker.
Word processing was provided by Carolyn Gulzow and Dora Ibarra.
iv


CONTENTS
PREFACE
i i
AC KNOWLEDG EM ENTS
i v
HABITAT USE INFORMATION...............................................
1
Genera 1
1
Food
1
Water
1
Cover
1
Reproduct ion
2
I nterspers i on
2
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL.................................
3
Model Applicability...........
3
Model Description...............................................
3
Model Relationships.............................................
5
Application of the Model..........
7
SOURC ES OF OTHER MODELS
8
REFERENCES CITED
8
v


MARTEN (Martes americana)
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
General
The marten (Martes americana) inhabits late successional
forest commun-
ities throughout northern North America (Marshall 1951).
The species is most
abundant in
association
with
mature
coniferous forests,
but
also
inhabits
forests of mixed deciduous and coniferous species (Hagmeier 1956).
Marten in
Minnesota were observed or captured most often
in conifer-dominated or mixed
stands
of
coniferous
and deciduous trees
(Mech
and
Rogers
1977).
Marten
prefer
softwood-domi nated
mi xed
stands
in
undi sturbed
forests
in
Ma i ne
(Soutiere 1979).
The marten is mostly carnivorous,
generally nocturnal, and
active throughout the year.
Food
Marten consume a wide variety of food items throughout the year.
Inverte-
brates, berries, and passerine birds were the most frequent food items recorded
from spring through
fall
in
a Montana
study
(Weckwerth
and Hawley 1962).
However, mammals were the most important food
item on an annual basis, with
the highest utilization of mammalian prey occurring during the winter months.
Voles
(Microtinae)
are utilized more than any other single food
item (Cowan
and Mackay 1950;
Lensink et al. 1955; Weckwerth and Hawley 1962;
Koehler and
Hornocker 1977; Soutiere 1979).
Mech and Rogers (1977)
reported that food availability is probably the
most important factor affecting the distribution of marten.
Fluctuations in
small
mammal densities in Montana were believed to directly affect the carrying
capacity of the study area for marten (Weckwerth and Hawley 1962).
Clark and
Campbell (1976) believed that limited access routes to get at prey below deep
snow may be more restrictive on marten winter densities than the actual density
of rodents present.
Water
No water requirements for the marten were described in the literature.
Cover
Mesic stands of mature coniferous trees with a canopy closure of 30% or
more supported the highest marten activity in Montana (Koehler and Hornocker
1977).
These sites also supported the greatest number of rodents and contained
the
highest diversity
of
understory
plant
species.
Sub-alpine fir
(Abies
lasiocarpa), Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii), and Douglas fir (PseudOtStJga
menziesii) stands were the most intensively used by marten during the winter
months in
Idaho (Marshall
1951).
Stands of Ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa)
were frequently used when adjacent to spruce-fir stands.
Eighty percent of
the marten observations in Colorado were
in spruce-fir stands or in forest
types which were at least partially comprised of spruce (Yeager and Remington
1956).


Marten
in Wyoming frequently select large [35.5 to 60.9 cm dbh (14 to
24 in)],
rotten
Engelmann spruce
or
sub-alpine fir
snags
as
refuge sites
(Clark
and Campbell
1976).
Other commonly
reported
refuge sites
include
ground burrows,
rock pi 1es,
and crevi ces (Mech and Rogers
1977),
downfa11,
stumps,
and
brush
or
slash piles (Marshall
1951; Clark and Campbell 1976;
Steventon and Major 1982).
Downfall,
in addition to providing refuge sites,
allow marten access to below snow surface galleries of vegetation and fallen
trees (Clark and Campbell 1976).
These "erit ry" sites are believed critical to
marten winter survival because they provide access to rodent prey active under
deep snow.
Such entry sites accounted for 92.8% of the recorded marten winter
feeding sites in Wyoming.
Ninty-seven percent of the marten winter resting
sites located in Maine were beneath the snow surface within natural cavities
formed around large decayed stumps (Steventon and Major 1982).
These refuge
sites were repeatedly used for several days at a time.
Hagmeier (1956) found
that, while marten
ranged through a variety of vegetative types, most refuge
sites were located within stands of coniferous trees.
Summer refuge sites in
Maine were
in the crowns
of conifer trees (Steventon and Major 1982).
No
refuge sites were located on the ground surface during this season.
Hawley and Newby (1957) believe that large openings serve as psychological
barriers to marten, while Koehler and Hornocker (1977) believe that openings,
which are avoided in the winter, may be used for foraging
in the
summer and
fall
seasons if
adequate
food
and cover are present.
Marten occasionally
crossed openings up to 164.5 m (180 yd)
in width in Maine during the winter
months (Soutiere 1979).
Although windfall and slash protruding from the snow
were investigated by marten, movements across such openings were more direct
than
movements within
uncut
forest
stands.
Marten
in
Colorado
have
been
observed at distances ranging from 0.8 to 3.2
km (0.5 to 2.0 mi) from forest
cover types from May through November (Streeter and Braun 1968).
In all
such
instances but one,
the species was observed in
large
boulder fields
which
provided a food
source [pika (Onchotona princeps)]
and cover in the form of
large boulders or rockslides.
Yeager (1950) believed that timber harvesting was the single most destruc-
tive factor contributing to the decimation of marten populations.
Marten in
Wyoming did not utilize harvested timber stands for at least
1 year after
cutting (Clark and Campbell 1976).
Marten in Maine rarely used clearcut areas
less than 15 years old but were found in partially harvested stands (Soutiere
1979).
Steventon and Major (1982) recorded significant avoidance of clearcut
areas by marten during winter.
Islands of uncut softwoods within and adjacent
to clearcuts were heavily utilized for cover and foraging in summer and winter.
Reproduction
The reproductive requirements of
the marten are assumed to be identical
with cover requirements, as described above.
Interspersion
Marten
populations
are
structured
around
male territories,
which
are
rigidly
defended
during
the
spring
and
summer months
(Clark and
Campbell
1976).
Home ranges of male martens are distinct, but female home ranges often
overlap those of other females and males.
Boundaries of marten
home ranges
often coincide with the edges of topographic or vegetative features,
such as
large, open meadows, burns and streams (Hawley and Newby 1957).
2


The mean home range size for marten in Montana was 2.4
km 2 (0.9 mi 2 ) and
0.69
km 2 (0.27 mi ")
for
males
and
females,
respectively
(Hawley and
Newby
1957).
Similar sizes were reported in Wyoming:
2.4
km 2 (0.93 mi 2 ) for males
and 0.88 km 2 (0.34 mi ") for females (Clark and Campbell
1976).
However, the
average
home
range
size
in
Minnesota was 15.6
km 2 (6.0 mt ")
for males
and
4.3
km 2 (1.7 mi 2 ) for females (Mech and Rogers 1977).
The average winter home
range for male marten
in Maine was 9.25
km 2
(3.57 mi 2 )
(Steventon and Major
1982).
Summer home range size was between 5.0 and 10.0 km 2 (1.93 to 3.86 mi 2 ) .
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL
Model Applicability
Geographic area.
This HSI model
has been developed for application
in
boreal coniferous forests of the western United States.
Season.
This HSI model
was developed to evaluate the potential quality
of
winter~abitat for marten.
The winter cover requirements of this species
are more restrictive than cover requirements during other seasons of the year.
It is assumed that if adequate winter cover is available, habitat requirements
throughout the balance of the year will not be limiting.
Cover types.
This model
was developed to
evaluate habitat in Evergreen
Forests (EF) (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1981).
Minimum habitat area.
Minimum habitat area
is defined
as
the
minimum
amount of contiguous habitat that is required before an area will be occupied
by a species.
Information on the minimum habitat area for the marten was not
reported
in the literature,
but home ranges in the western United States are
approximately 2.38
km 2 (0.92 mi 2 ) for males.
Based on this information, it is
assumed that at least 2.59
km 2 (1 mi 2 )
of suitable habitat must be available
before an area will be occupied by this species.
If less than 2.59
km 2 (1 mi 2 )
of suitable habitat is present, the HSI is assumed to be 0.0.
Verification level.
This
model
was reviewed
by Tim
W.
Clark,
Ph.D.,
Biology Department,
Idaho State
University.
Dr. Clark
concluded that this
Habitat Suitability
Index
model
would yield
an accurate
representation of
marten habitat suitability (Clark, pers. comm.).
Model Description
Overview.
All winter habitat requirements of the marten can be satisfied
within boreal evergreen forests.
The marten is, therefore, treated as utiliz-
ing
evergreen
forests
only,
and habitat
evaluation
using this
model
only
considers the quality of life requisites provided by evergreen forests.
It is
assumed that food availability will not be limiting for the marten if adequate
cover is present.
The following sections provide documentation of the logic and assumptions
used
to translate habitat
information for the marten
to
the
variables
and
equations
used
in
the
HSI
model.
Specifically,
these
sections
cover:
(1) identification of variables used
in the model;
(2) definition and justi-
fication
of the suitability levels of each variable;
and (3) description of
the assumed relationships between variables.
3


Figure 1 illustrates the relationships of habitat variables, life req-
uisites, and cover types for the marten.
Habitat variable
Percent tree canopy closure
Percent of overstory canopy
closure comprised of fir
or spruce
Successional stage of
stand
Percent of ground surface
covered by downfall
Life
requisite
Wi nter cover ---
Cover types
Evergreen forest ---- HSI
Figure 1.
Relationships of habitat variables, life requisites,
and cover types in the marten HSI model.
Cover component.
The marten
may
range
through
various
forested
and
non-forested cover types throughout the spri ng,
summer,
and fa 11.
Based on
the literature, mature stands of evergreen trees, particularly spruce and fir,
are required during the winter months in order to provide adequate protective
and thermal cover.
Suitable winter cover
is
a function
of the successional
stage or the
stand, the percent of the stand which is comprised of spruce or fir, the total
percent canopy closure of the stand, and the amount of downfall
in the stand.
Stands of mature to
overmature con i ferous forest,
compri sed
of
40%
fi r
or
spruce, with a total
canopy closure greater than 50%, are assumed to provide
near optimal winter habitat.
Forest
stands
which
contain
an
abundance
of
downfall or windthrow are assumed to have a higher winter cover value because
such materials provide refuge sites for the marten and accessibility to small
mammals active under the
snowpack.
Although small
diameter woody debris on
the forest floor wi 11 prov ide cover for rodents,
ma rten
requi re
the presence
of partially fallen
snags,
or large logs,
on the ground
surface to
provide
access points for foraging under the snow's surface.
Sparse forest stands are assumed to
provide marginal
cover for marten;
therefore,
a tree canopy closure of less than
25% will
indicate no value as
winter cover for the species.
It is also assumed that any tree species present
within a forest stand will have some value as winter cover for marten.
There-
fore, the lowest value which may be obtained for this variable is 0.1.
Forest
stands dominated by shrubs or seedling sized trees are assumed to provide no
value as winter cover for marten.
Pole sized and young stands of trees provide
some cover, while mature or old growth stands provide optimum cover.
A ground
surface covered by downfall ranging from 20% to 50% is assumed to have optimum
val ue.
However,
the absence of downfall
or presence of a high density of
these materials will not severely limit the cover value for marten.
The percent tree canopy closure and successional
stage of the stand are
the
two most
limiting
variables
for determining the suitability of marten
winter habitat.
When either of these variables is outside the suitable ranges
4


defined above, marten habitat will not be present.
The presence of little or
no spruce or fir
in a forest
stand will
lower the value of the habitat for
marten.
However, the absence of these species will
not exclude the area as
potential marten habitat.
Although the percent of the ground surface covered
by downfall
has the least amount of influence in the determination of marten
winter habitat suitability,
such
material
is essentail
to
provide
optimal
winter habitat.
An excessive amount of downfall
(> 50%) is assumed to decrease
the availability and accessibility of
prey for marten.
It is assumed that
mature or old growth forest stands will provide a sufficient number of snags
and partially fallen trees to allow entry points under the snow's surface.
Model Relationships
Suitability Index (SI) graphs for habitat variables.
The
relationships
between various conditions of habitat variables and habitat suitability for
the marten are graphically represented in this section.
Cover
type
EF
Variable
Percent tree canopy
closure.
1.a
x
OJ
-g 0.8
c-,
.;: 0.6
.D
~ 0.4
=:l
(/)0.2
25
50
%
75
100
EF
Percent of overstory
canopy closure
com-
prised of fir or
spruce.
1.0
x
~ 0.8
c
.......
];' 0.6
~ 0.4
4-'
'r-
::::l
(/) 0.2
5
25
50
%
75
100


EF
Successional stage of
stand.
A)
shrub-seedling
B)
pole sapling
C)
young
D)
mature or old growth
1.0
><
OJ
-g 0.8
>,
:;:0.6
.0
.B 0.4
0.2
A
B
c
o
EF
Percent of ground
surface covered by
downfall which is
~ 7.6 cm (3 in) in
diameter.
1.0
><
OJ-00.8
c::
........
~0.6
-g 0.4
+-'
~
Vl 0.2
Successional Stage
25
50
%
75
100
Equations.
In order to obtain life requisite values for the marten, the
SI values for appropriate variables must be combined through the use of equa-
tions.
A discussion
and
explanation
of
the
assumed
relationships
between
variables was included under Model Description,
and the specific equation
in
this model
was chosen to mimic these perceived biological
relationships as
closely as possible.
The suggested
equation
for
obtaining
a winter
cover
value is presented below.
Life requisite
Winter cover
Cover type
EF
Equations
HS1 determination.
Since
winter
cover
was
the
only
life
requisite
considered in this model, the HS1 equals the winter cover value.
6


Application of the Model
Definitions of variables and suggested field measurement techniques (Hays
et al. 1981) are provided in Figure 2.
Variable (Definition)
(VI)
Percent tree canopy
closure.
[The percent
of the ground surface
that is shaded by a
vertical projection of
the canopies of all
woody vegetation taller
than 5.0 m (16.5 ft)].
(V2 )
Percent
of the over-
story canopy closure
comprised of fir or
spruce.
(The percent
canopy closure of
spruce or fir trees
in the overstory
divided by the total
canopy closure of all
overstory trees.)
(V3 )
Successional stage of
stand.
(The structural
condition of a forest
community which occurs
during its development.)
Six recognized stages:
1.
grass-forb
2.
shrub-seedling
3.
pole-sapling
4.
young
5.
mature
6.
old growth
Cover types
EF
EF
EF
Suggested technique
Line intercept, remote
sensing
Line intercept, remote
sensing
On-site inspection,
remote sensing
Figure 2.
Definitions of variables and suggested measurement techniques.
7


(V4 )
Percent of ground
surface covered by
downfall which is
~ 7.6 cm (3 in) in
diameter.
(The per-
cent of the ground
surface which is
covered by dead, woody
material which may
include: tree boles;
stumps; root wads; or
limbs.)
SOURCES OF OTHER MODELS
EF
Figure 2.
(concluded)
Line intercept, quadrat
No other habitat models for the marten were located.
REFERENCES CITED
Clark, T. W.
Personal communication (letter dated 28 July 1981).
Idaho State
University, Pocatello, Idaho.
Clark,
T. W., and T.
M.
Campbell,
III.
regulatory mechanisms of martens
in
Proceedings of the First Conference
Parks,
U.S.D.l.
Natl.
Park
Serv.,
pp. 293-295.
1976.
Population organization and
Grand Teton National
Park, Wyoming.
on Scientific Research in the National
Trans.
Proc.
Series 5.
Vol.
1.
Cowan,
1.
M., and
R.
H.
Mackay.
1950.
Food habits of the marten (Martes
americana)
in
the
Rocky
Mountain
region
of
Canada.
Can.
Field-Nat.
64(3):100-104.
Hagmeier,
E.
M.
1956.
Distribution of marten and fisher
in
North America.
Can. Field-Nat. 70(4):149-168.
Hawley,
V.
D.,
and F.
E. Newby.
1957.
Marten
home
ranges
and population
fluctuations.
J. Mammal. 38(2):174-184.
Hays,
R.
L.,
C. S. Summers, and W. Seitz.
1981.
Estimating wildlife habitat
variables.
U.S.D.l., Fish and Wildlife Service, FWS/OBS-81/47, 173 pp.
Koehler, G. M., and M.
G. Hornocker.
1977.
Fire effects on marten habitat in
the Se1way-Bitterroot Wi 1derness.
J. Wi 1dl. Manage. 41( 3): 500-505.
Lensink, C. J.,
R.
O. Skoog, and J.
L. Buckley.
1955.
in
interior
Alaska
and
their
significance.
19(3):364-368.
8
Food habits of marten
J.
Wildl.
Manage.


Marshall, W. H. 1951.
Pine marten as a forest product.
J. For. 49(2):899-905.
Mech, L. D.,
and L. L. Rogers.
1977.
Status, distribution, and movements of
martens in northeastern Minnesota.
U.S.D.A.
For.
Servo
Res.
Pap.
NC-143.
7 pp.
Soutiere,
E.
C.
1979.
Effects of timber harvesting on marten in Maine.
J.
Wi 1d1. Manage. 43( 4) :850-860.
Steventon,
J.
D.,
and
J.
T.
Major.
1982.
Marten
use
of
habitat
in
commercially clear-cut forest.
J. Wildl. Manage. 46(1):175-182.
Streeter,
R.
G.,
and
C.
E.
Braun.
1968.
Occurrence
of
marten,
Martes
americana, (Carnivora: Mustelidae) in Colorado alpine areas.
Southwest.
Nat. 13(4):449-451.
U.S.
Fish
and
Wildlife
Service.
1981.
Standards
for
the
development
of
habitat suitability index models.
103 ESM.
U.S.D.l.
Fish Wildl.
Serv.,
Div. Ecol. Servo
n.p.
Weckwerth,
R. P., and V. D. Hawley.
1962.
Marten food habits and population
fluctuations in Montana.
J. Wildl. Manage. 26(1):55-74.
Yeager,
L. E.
1950.
Implications of some harvest and habitat factors on pine
marten management.
Trans. N. Am. Wildl. Conf. 15:319-334.
Yeager,
L. E.,
and J.
D. Remington.
1956.
Sight observations of Colorado
martens.
J. Mammal. 37(4):521-524.
9


.50272 ., 01
REPORT DOCUMENTATION
i 1. REPORT NO.
PAGE
I' - FWSjOBS-82jlO.11
4.
Title and Subtitle
Habitat Suitability Index Models:
Pine marten
7. Author(s)
Arthur W. Allen
9. Performing 0rcanization Name and Address
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, Colorado
80526
12. Soonsoring Ofllanization Name and Address Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of Interior
Washington, D.C.
20240
15. Supplementary Notes
. lIS. Abstract (Limit: 200 words)
113. Recipient's Accession No.
February 1982
6.
8. Perform;n. Orcanizatlon Rept. No.
10. Project/Tnk/Work Unit No.
11. Contract(C) or Grant(G) No.
(C)
(G)
13. Type of Reoort & Period Covered
14.
Habitat preferences and species characteristics of the pine marten (Martes americana)
are described in this publication.
It is one of a series of Habitat Suitability Index
(HSI) models and was developed through an analysis of available scientific data on
the species-habitat requirements of the pine marten.
Habitat use information is
-,
presented in a review of the literature, followed by the development of a HSI model.
~
The model is presented in three formats:
graphic, word and mathematical.
Suitability
index graphs quantify the species-habitat relationship.
These data are then synthesized
into a model which is designed to provide information for use in impact assessment
and habitat management activities.
17. Document Analysis
a.
Desc:ripto~
Habi tabi 1i ty
Wildlife
b.
Identlfie~/Open·Ended Terms
Marten
Ma rtes americana
Habitat Suitability Index
Habi ta t
c. COSATI Field/Group
18. Availability Statement
Unlimited
(See ANSI-Z39.18)
{:[
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE' 1982-578·133/195 REGION NO.8
19.
Security Class (This Report>
Unclassified
20.
Security Class (This Page)
Ilnrl ;lCC ; f"iorl
See InstructIons on Reverse
I 21. No. of Pages
II
9
--
I 22. Price
I
OPTIONAL FORM 272 (4-771
(Formerly
NTI~351
1'"'\.........
•
""# ro....-_......


Cl
o
(T).(1)
LEGEND
Headquar!ers· Office Qf Biol()gical
services, Washington, C.C.
National Coastal Ecosystems Team,
Slidell. La..
Western Energy and Land Use T.am,
Fort Collins, Co.
Regional Offices
REGION 1
Re!ion~11 Director
U.S.Fim aridWjldlife$'rvlCo
Uoyd Fiv~ Hundred JJl.Jilding, Suite J692
SOON.E. Multnomah-$treet
.POrtland, OreiQn 91132
REGION 2
Rel!ona! Director
US. fish and Wildlife Service
P.O.Box 1106
.Albuquerque, New MexlcQ 81103
IlEGION 3 .
~oniI Director
lI.S. FishalulWildUfeService
..,
Federal Bw1dins. Fort Sfle!UAg
. TwinCitieS. Minnesota5SH 1
U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
REGIONAL OfFICES
-IWGION.
-Relional Direeter
U.S. Fish and WildlifeService
Richard B.-RuuenBuUding
75Sprioi Street, S.W.
Atlanta:~ Georgia30303
REGION S
·Rtponal Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
OneGatewayCenter
Newton Comer, Massachusetts 02158
REGION 6
Regional Director
U.S. FM and WildlifeService
P.O. Box 25486
Den~~r FederalCenter.
~nver,Colorado80225
REGIOl'\l 7
Reliont. Director
U.S. Flsh:,and'Wildlife Service
Ion E,Tudor Road
Anchoraac,Al.ska9950J


DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
u.s. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
t ."
.,..".."'"",,..
"'•. tl,tl to
~
.
.
:
"'""" ,.' .•..•
As the Nation's principal conservation agency. the Department of the Interior has respon-
sibility for most ot our nationally owned public lands and natural resources. ThIs includes
fostering the weest use of our land and water resources. protecting our fish and wildlife,
preserving tne envrrcnmentet and cultural values of our national parks and historical places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The Department as-
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to assure that me« development is in
the best interests of all our people. Th e Department also has a major responsibility for
American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. administration.
