--- 
source: 2007 000n-17.pdf
--- 

 
OTTERS IN SACS – IS THIS THE WAY FORWARD? 
 
Paul R.F. CHANIN 
  
North View Cottage, Union Rd, Crediton, Devon, EX17 3AL, England, UK 
email: mammals@chaninweb.co.uk  
 
 
Abstract: The purpose, extent and implications of the designation of SACs in the UK are described in relation to 
the needs for otter conservation.  It is suggested that the scheme is too limited in scope to be of significant 
benefit to otters which are recovering in numbers throughout the UK.  The otter population is likely to continue 
to recolonise areas in which it became extinct in the 1960s and 1970s but continued monitoring is essential. 
 
Key words: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, Special Area of Conservation, SAC, Habitats Directive 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) are areas of land which have been designated under the 
European Union’s Habitats Directive and form part of a  
 
“European network of important high-quality conservation sites that will make a significant ontribution to 
conserving the 169 habitat types and 623 species identified in Annexes I and II of the [Habitats] Directive” 
(MCLEOD ET AL., 2002).   
 
SACs, together with Special Protection Areas (designed for bird protection) form the Natura 
2000 Network. 
Many SACs protect a range of habitats and species and of course those designated for 
one species or habitat are very likely to be of value to others.  This is particularly the case for 
otters where any ‘aquatic’ or wetland SAC will be of value provided there is sufficient food 
for them. 
 
 
2   SACS IN THE UK 
 
Table 1 shows the number of SACs in each country in the United Kingdom together with the 
area covered by SACs and what this represents as a proportion of the total land area.  Overall, 
approximately 6.5% of the land area of the UK has been proposed for designation and in 60% 
of this area (or 28% of SACs numerically) otters are recognised as a feature of interest. 
 
Table 1:  Number and size of SACs in each country. 
 
 
All SACs 
SACs with otters 
 
No. 
Area (km2) 
% Land* 
No. 
Area (km2) 
% Land 
England 
217 
9,111 
5.4% 
31 
3,625 
2.2% 
Scotland 
231 
8,460 
7.9% 
97 
6,635 
6.2% 
Wales 
89 
5,933 
6.8% 
23 
3,813 
4.4% 
N. Ireland 
51 
651 
3.9% 
13 
377 
2.2% 
Total 
588 
24,155 
6.5% 
164 
14,450 
3.9% 
 
* % Land is the proportion of the total area of land in each country represented by SACs. 


 
 
2.1 Size of individual SACs 
Otter home ranges vary greatly in length but on the basis of studies by GREEN, GREEN AND 
JEFFERIES (1984), KRUUK ET AL. (1993), ROCHE ET AL. (1995) and COXON ET AL. (1999), 40 
kilometres may be used as an approximation for the size of male ranges, with females’ being 
approximately half as long. 
Figure 1 shows the size distribution of river SACs in which otters are a feature of 
interest.  Note that the majority (64%) are within the first two size categories, no more than 80 
kilometres in length which suggests that the numbers of resident otters ‘protected’ in most 
SACs is very small and would not constitute a viable population. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Size frequency of SACs on UK rivers 
 
2.2 Consequences of designating a SAC 
Once SACs have been designated, member states of the European Union have a number of 
obligations to fulfil in order to maintain the quality and integrity of the Natura 2000 network 
(MCLEOD ET AL., 2002).  Obligations include a need to: 
 
• 
establish conservation measures which correspond to the ecological requirements of the 
habitats and species present on the site; 
• 
take appropriate steps to avoid deterioration of the natural habitats and habitats of 
species, as well as significant disturbance of species, for which the site is designated; 
• 
carry out appropriate assessment of the implications of any plans or projects that are 
likely to have a significant effect on the site in view of the site’s conservation objectives. 
 
In addition there is an obligation to monitor SACs. Not only in terms of the numbers of the 
species and extent of the habitats concerned but also the ‘condition’ of the habitat in relation 
to the species’ ecological requirements. 
 
2.3 SACs and otter conservation 
Is a site-based conservation strategy appropriate for a wide ranging carnivore like the otter 
which can exploit a wide range of ecological conditions (CHANIN, 2003)? 
This problem is recognised by the Joint Nature Conservation Committee which, in a report 
on the selection of SACs (MCLEOD ET AL., 2002) points out that: 
0
5
10
15
20
40
120
200
280
360
440
520
600
680
760
840
Approx. length in Km
N


 
 
‘However, most habitats and species are more widely distributed, and only a proportion of the total national and 
Community resource will be protected within SACs.  For these interest features, maintaining or achieving 
favourable conservation status will require a complementary mix of site-based conservation measures and 
actions to be taken outside the SAC network.’ 
 
Clearly most of the otters in Britain are, and always will be, outside the SAC network, 
particularly in England.  Does this matter?   We could not designate a substantial area of the 
otter’s range in the UK without increasing the area under SAC designation by an order of 
magnitude which is clearly impractical.  
On the other hand it would not be considered acceptable to only secure the conservation 
status of otters on the 4% of Britain’s surface covered by otter SACs.  This is certainly far less 
ambitions than the objective of the Otter Species Action Plan (THE UK BIODIVERSITY 
STEERING GROUP, 1995) which aims to:  
 
‘By 2010, restore breeding otters to all catchments and coast areas where they have been recorded since 1960’. 
 
2.4 Historical perspective 
In England the otter population declined almost to extinction in the 1960s and 1970s but over 
the past 25 years has made a substantial recovery throughout a large part of its former range.  
The failure to recolonise some areas yet can still be explained by distance and time since areas 
close to residual populations and places where otters have been re-introduced are colonised 
first.  As yet, there is no substantial evidence to suggest that otters will fail to recolonise any 
part of the UK.   
Provided no new toxic chemicals which affect otters are introduced and the food 
supply is adequate, it seems likely that the otter population will continue to spread through 
England and Wales until it is present more or less throughout the countries.  However, this 
process may take several more decades in England.  
One thing is essential - to continue the monitoring of the otter population in a way that 
will enable us to detect not only a decline in the population but also a significant slowing 
down in the rate of recovery.  It is therefore important to ensure that resources invested in 
monitoring otters in SACs do not detract from those available for national monitoring and 
surveillance. 
 
 
3   SO… ARE SACS THE WAY FORWARD FOR OTTER CONSERVATION? 
 
For species which have very specific habitat requirements, move comparatively short 
distances and have a limited or rapidly declining distribution (such as freshwater pearl 
mussels, Desmoulin’s whorl snail or the white clawed crayfish) the SAC network has the 
potential to provide a sound basis for conservation by ensuring that populations are given a 
high level of protection in some areas at least.  However, for an adaptable species like the 
otter, which has a home range measured in tens of kilometres and is currently increasing its 
range, legislation and directives which have a direct impact on water quality are more likely 
to be important. 
 
 
4   REFERENCES 
 
CHANIN, P.  2003.  Ecology of the European Otter Lutra lutra.  Conserving Natura 2000 Rivers Ecology Series No. 
10.  Peterborough, English Nature. 


 
COXON, K., CHANIN, P., DALLAS, J.F. & SYKES, T. 1999. The use of DNA fingerprinting to study the population 
dynamics of otters (Lutra lutra) in southern Britain: a feasibility study. Environment Agency, R&D Technical 
Report W202, Swindon. 
GREEN, J.R., GREEN, R. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1984. A radio-tracking survey of otters Lutra lutra on a Perthshire 
river system. Lutra 27: 85-145. 
KRUUK, H., CARSS, D.N., CONROY, J.W.H. & DURBIN, L. 1993. Otter (Lutra lutra L) numbers and fish 
productivity in rivers in north east Scotland. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, 65: 171-191. 
MCLEOD, C.R., YEO, M., BROWN, A.E., BURN, A.J., HOPKINS, J.J., & WAY, S.F. (EDITORS.) 2002. The 
Habitats Directive: selection of Special Areas of Conservation in the UK. Joint Nature Conservation Committee, 
Peterborough.[2nd edition] www.jncc.gov.uk/SACselection 
ROCHE, K., HARRIS, R., WARRINGTON, S. & COPP, G.H. 1995. Home range and diet of re-introduced European 
otters Lutra lutra (L) in Hertfordshire rivers. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems,  5: 87-
96. 
THE UK BIODIVERSITY STEERING GROUP 1995. Biodiversity: The UK Steering Group Report - Volume II: 
Action Plans (Annex G - Species Action Plans, Habitat Action Plans and Habitat Statements). HMSO, London. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
