--- 
source: 2007 000n-55.pdf
--- 

RE-INTRODUCTIONS AS A TOOL IN OTTER CONSERVATION 
 
Don J. JEFFERIES1, Philip WAYRE2, Jeanne WAYRE2 AND Richard SHUTER2 
                 
1  The Nature Conservancy Council, Peterborough, England, UK. 
2.  The Otter Trust, Earsham, Bungay, Suffolk, NR35 2AF, England, UK. 
 
 
Abstract. The otter populations of eastern England were almost eliminated by the agricultural use of 
organochlorine insecticides in the late 1950s following earlier persecution and the few survivors were separated 
from the larger recovering populations of the west by an area largely devoid of otters. The western otters are 
moving eastwards at a rate of only 3.6 km/year so sustaining recruitment to the east could not occur for many 
years, by which time the few remaining eastern otters would have died and their ‘gene pool’ would have been 
lost. These eastern populations were rebuilt from 1983 to 1998 by the release of 87 captive-bred otters to East 
Anglia and the East Midlands by the Otter Trust and 41 rehabilitated otters to north eastern England by the 
Vincent Wildlife Trust. The successful techniques used are described and the rate of re-occupation of eastern 
rivers is demonstrated by the results of spraint surveys. 
   
Keywords: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, re-introductions, conservation, England 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Surveys had shown that the British otter Lutra lutra population was very low and still 
decreasing rapidly in the east of England in the late 1970s and early 1980s, even though the 
causal agents (organochlorines and persecution) had been tackled and reduced (JEFFERIES, 
1996).  Thus, conservationists had their ‘backs to the wall’. Had the population decreased to 
such a critical point that recovery was now unlikely?  All potential conservation techniques 
were considered by the Joint Otter Group (JOG) of necessity and with some urgency 
(O’CONNOR ET AL., 1979) (the JOG was a group of academic and government research 
zoologists who were charged with looking at the seriousness of the otter problem and what 
could be done about it). 
 
Consequently, after the initial research (JEFFERIES AND MITCHELL-JONES, 1982; 
JEFFERIES, 1984a; J JEFFERIES AND WAYRE, 1984; JEFFERIES ET AL., 1986; WAYRE, 1989) the 
technique of releasing groups of otters into the field was first used as a conservation tool in 
Britain as early as 1983.  This was the first successful, systematic and monitored use of the 
technique on otters anywhere in Europe. Technically, these first releases of captive-bred stock 
to eastern England by the Otter Trust were not re-introductions but were re-stocking or 
reinforcement exercises.  Isolated fragments of the original wild population still existed as 
‘islands’ at the time and the release groups were introduced between the fragments, as shown 
by survey, in order to reinforce them by interbreeding.  In this way it was hoped to repopulate 
the areas concerned. 
 
The original idea of releasing captive-bred stock was put forward to the JOG by Philip 
Wayre (PW) (Chairman/Founder) and Jeanne Wayre (JW) (Director) of the Otter Trust in the 
late 1970s.  At the time of the programmes’ inception Don Jefferies (DJJ) was Head of Wild 
Mammals Section, their research and conservation over Great Britain, in the Chief Scientists 
Team of the Governments Nature Conservancy Council and a member of JOG as well as the 
Council of the Otter Trust.  Consequently, the planning and method of release, together with 
the radio-tracking of the initial releases fell to him. Richard Shuter (RS), the Otter Trusts 
Conservation Officer since 1994, is the last of a series of conservation officers who have 


continued the original programme, selecting the new release sites, liaising with site owners, 
building the release pens and releasing the otters. 
 
The programme of captive-bred releases by the Otter Trust was completed in 1999 
(JEFFERIES, WAYRE AND SHUTER, 2001) and its success as a conservation tool is evaluated 
here with particular reference to East Anglia but covering the experimental releases elsewhere. 
 
A second, later series of releases were made to eastern England by the Vincent 
Wildlife Trust (VWT) from 1990 to 1993 (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996; GREEN, 1997).  
These were carried out further north than those of the Otter Trust and tested the use of 
rehabilitated otters (accident victims, reared orphaned cubs) largely from Scotland, rather than 
captive-bred animals.  The numbers, areas and success of this variant technique have been 
detailed previously (WOODROFFE, 1993, 1996; GREEN, 1997) and are covered in Section 11 
(below).  
 
 
2   BACKGROUND: THE ‘CRASH’ OF THE BRITISH OTTER POPULATION 
 
CHANIN AND JEFFERIES (1978) analysed the record books of the various otter hunts over 
England, Wales and southern Scotland and determined that the ‘crash’ of the British otter 
population had started suddenly in 1957.  Also, it occurred all over the country at the same 
time but was most severe in the south and east of England.  The decline was undoubtedly (on 
timing, area of greatest effect and chemical analysis of bodies) caused by the agricultural use 
of the persistent cyclodiene organochlorine insecticides, particularly aldrin and dieldrin 
(JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 2002).  Their use as cereal seed dressings in the east and sheep dips 
in the west and north started in 1956.  However, it was considered that the ‘crash’ was 
exacerbated by the low and stressed status of the otter population due to years of persecution 
(JEFFERIES, 1989a; STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996).  Dieldrin and aldrin were also the cause 
of the concurrent declines of the peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus) and sparrowhawk 
(Accipiter nisus) in Britain. Research on their environmental effects and contamination levels 
in the 1960s, particularly that by the Toxic Chemicals and Wildlife Section of the Nature 
Conservancy under Professor Norman Moore at Monks Wood (which included DJJ at that 
time), eventually led to a series of bans on their uses in 1962, 1966, 1975, 1981 and 1983.  
The peregrine and sparrowhawk began to recover and the way should also have been open for 
the recovery of the otter population in Britain. 
 
It had become essential that conservationists should be able to measure the strength of 
the otter population following the ‘crash’.  Status, distribution and density of site occupation 
needed to be determined by structured survey in order to lay down a baseline from which to 
measure future trends.  Only then could we be sure that the situation was indeed improving or 
even declining further.  Consequently, DJJ designed, co-ordinated and analysed the first 
national otter surveys starting in 1977.  The first survey of England over 1977-1979 indicated 
an appalling situation with only 5.9% of the 2,940 survey sites still occupied by otters 
(LENTON, CHANIN AND JEFFERIES, 1980).  The population of eastern England was fragmented 
into small groups with individuals many miles apart (JEFFERIES, 1989c).  What is more, far 
from recovering, these fragments were dying out one by one.  Indeed, by the time of the 
second national survey over 1984-86, although there were the first signs of a slow recovery in 
the larger population of the west, the East Anglian population had declined even further from 
its low 3.2% occupation at the first survey (STRACHAN ET AL., 1990).  The figures for the 
Norfolk and Suffolk wild populations were 10.1% and 1.7%, respectively, in 1977-79 and 
0.6% and 0% in 1984-86.  It was considered that the Suffolk population in particular was 
likely to disappear completely by 1986.  The decline had progressed too far in the Anglian 


Region and the population was now considered too small and too fragmented to recover 
unaided. 
 
Faced with this situation, the conservationists of the Joint Otter Group considered 
several immediate measures (O’CONNOR ET AL., 1979).  One was legal protection, and a case 
for the species to be placed on Schedule 1 of the Conservation of Wild Creatures and Wild 
Plants Act 1975 was prepared by DJJ and put forward by the Nature Conservancy Council in 
1978.  The otter received legal protection in England and Wales in the same year against 
considerable opposition in the House of Lords. Legal protection in Scotland under the 
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 followed in 1982.  This is the first basic requirement for 
any conservation plan.  One must increase the chances of survival to breeding of all remaining 
stock.  The second of the practical measures then considered was the idea of Philip Wayre, 
that of the release of captive-bred otters from the Otter Trust. Legal protection is, of course, a 
basic requirement for this technique as well.  There would not have been any point in 
releasing otters for the otter hounds to hunt. Subsequently, the JOG asked DJJ in 1979 to look 
into the feasibility of the proposition, to devise a method of release, and then to test its success 
in the field.   
 
 
3   METHODS  
 
3.1 Radio-tracking 
The first prerequisite of the planned release project was that we should be able to follow the 
otters after release, (a) to watch their behaviour and see how well they fitted into the wild and 
caught fish for the first time, and (b) to make sure that they survived long enough to breed.  
Otherwise, releasing them and remaining in the dark as to their whereabouts, survival and the 
success of the project, could have been a waste of labour and animals. 
 
As otters had not been successfully radio-tracked in Britain at that time, the first 
research project concentrated on a method of attaching the radio-transmitter to the otter.  This 
had to be non-invasive and short-lived, dropping off the animal after a few weeks, rather than 
having to be carried around for the rest of its life.  Otters provide problems here as the usual 
neck collars are unsuitable.  The otter’s head is narrower than its neck, so they can work them 
off.  Hence, PW provided a male and female otter in 1980 so that DJJ and Tony Mitchell-
Jones could carry out practical trials.  The latter designed and made a soft leather harness to 
carry the radio package.  The rusting of rivets allowed the harness to disintegrate after a short 
period of time (MITCHELL-JONES ET AL., 1984).  This was found to work perfectly and the first 
otter was tracked for 50 days before the harness came off and the radio was retrieved for re-
use. 
 
Radio-tracking of the male in the release group was carried out for the first two Otter 
Trust releases.  The successful adaptation to the new conditions of the wild environment was 
so rapid that it was considered no longer essential for the later releases. 
 
3.2  Derivation of otters 
 
3.2.1 Captive breeding. The young otters for the releases were to be captive-bred at the Otter 
Trust using the methods devised and experience gained over many years (WAYRE, 1989).  
They were, in fact, the first people to breed Lutra lutra in captivity since A.H. Cocks in 1881. 
The use of captive breeding allows the number of the original stock held to be ‘multiplied’ 
before release.  Also, the resulting progeny may be taken safely past the age of first 
independence before having to encounter and survive the dangers of the field. 


 
3.2.2 Genetic considerations. The foundation breeding stock at the Otter Trust originated from 
Norfolk and Suffolk.  These were bought from the coypu (Myocastor coypus) trappers who 
occasionally caught otters in their live traps during the first control campaign of the 1950s and 
1960s.  This was long before legal protection of the otter in 1978.  Eight of these otters were 
kept for the foundation stock and the rest released (WAYRE in JESSOP AND CHEYNE, 1993).  
This was a major reason for choosing East Anglia for the initial release project (Section 
3.4.1).  The ‘gene pool’ was widened to avoid inbreeding by the continuous ‘injection’ of 
orphaned and reared cubs (WAYRE AND WAYRE, 2000; JEFFERIES, in press) from throughout 
Scotland; there being few such animals from England. 
 
There is a further factor which could have an effect on the success of any re-
introduction project and that is outbreeding depression.  This occurs by the disruption of 
groups of interacting genes which have evolved together within the same species to fit it by 
natural selection for existence in different environments within the one distribution (LACY, 
PETRIC AND WARNEKE, 1993).  The use and interbreeding of several cryptic geographical 
races for stock for release programmes could cause such a disruption.  The only way round 
this would have been to use only the animals derived from East Anglia or only from one 
homogeneous area of Scotland.  However, it would have been difficult then to obtain 
sufficient stock without running into the (possibly more severe) problem of inbreeding. 
 
 


 
In practice the conundrum of which of the two forms of stock selection should be used 
was overcome by use of both.  There was no alternative.  Thus, the wider Scottish ‘gene pool’ 
should avoid the possibility of inbreeding and the narrow East Anglian stock should avoid 
outbreeding.  Close examination of the release groups, their progeny and casualties (JEFFERIES 
ET AL., 1985; JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 1988, 1991) showed no overt detrimental abnormalities 
which could have been due to inbreeding depression and the end results described in this 
paper speak for themselves (Figure 1). 
 
The bloodstock for the releases of rehabilitated otters (Section 11) came from all over 
Scotland so only the problem of outbreeding remains.  The problems of inbreeding and 
outbreeding depressions as they apply to otters and re-introduction programmes are covered 
more fully in a further paper (JEFFERIES, in press).  
 
3.3  Practicalities of release 
 
3.3.1 Pre-release management of otters. The age at removal of the cubs from the mother and at 
release is critical.  The Otter Trust cubs were not separated from the mother until the 
completion of the ‘natural’ dependence period, which is about ten months, when the mother 
may come into oestrus.  Also, it was considered in 1982, when preparing the stock for the first 
release, that the highest rate of successful transition to the wild and survival could be expected 
if the otters were about 18 months old at release and the release took place in summer.  This 
eliminates two periods of high mortality, (a) when first attaining independence from the 
mother, and (b) the first winter following independence. In addition, this age reduces the 
length of time before first breeding can be achieved in the field (at around two years of age) 
and the new population focus is consolidated, i.e. the release group has less time to separate. 
 
There has been some recent research which strongly supports this extended period 
before release.  Thus, SJÖÅSEN (1996), carrying out releases of captive-bred and wild-caught 
otters in Sweden, demonstrated that the captive-bred stock suffered a significantly higher 
mortality and early death in the field than did the wild-caught animals.  However, as the two 
groups were treated very differently in these experiments and the captive-bred animals were 
all less than 12 months old at release, whereas the wild-caught animals were much older (i.e. 
over 12 months) the tests provide a good demonstration of the value of using older, 
experienced stock, with a longer period of independence as released in Britain.  Indeed, radio-
tracked groups of captive-bred otters of >18 months of age did not show this reported high 
early mortality (JEFFERIES ET AL., 1986).  The length of maternal care too is of considerable 
importance.  SJÖÅSEN showed that the least successful otters after release were those separated 
from their mothers only 50-98 days before their early release.  Those with longer periods of 
maternal care, on the other hand, had similar success to the wild-caught animals. 
 
The animals forming each release group need to be unrelated but reared together as it 
is important that the group stays together if the formation of a breeding unit is to be achieved 
in the field.  It was thought that the release group should be made up of two females and one 
male.  This was usual in the early days and approximates to the situation seen in the field in 
Britain, when a mature male may have at least two breeding-aged females within his home 
range (GREEN, GREEN AND JEFFERIES, 1984).  Releasing two males of the same age could 
result in territorial fighting, but, on the other hand, the death of the only male in a road 
accident renders the release sterile.  We had to release a second male at one site (Minsmere) 
after the first had been killed in such an accident (JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 1988).  There is 
also the problem of what to do with the excess males if only one is released, as the sex ratio at 
birth is one to one.  These concerns led to the usual release group being made up of two 
females and two males during and after 1994 and there has been no evidence of territorial 


disputes during the early period of a release exercise, though they did occur later when the 
population was established (JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 1991).  The use of more males in release 
groups was eventually validated by the discovery of a higher rate of road mortality in this sex 
(Section 12.4). 
 
It was planned that the requisite group of unrelated cubs should be transferred to a 
large pre-release pen on removal from their mothers at around ten months.  This pre-release, 
or ‘quiet’, pen (one for each group and sized 1,200 square metres) had a pool and sleeping 
boxes.  Food was placed under cover so that they could feed unwatched and undisturbed; the 
idea was that these units should have little contact with man so that the otters would remain 
untamed and would hide from people rather than approach them.  Here they were to remain 
until, aged about 18 months, they were taken to the release site.  This also acted as a long 
quarantine period so that no diseases were released to the field.  Again, it is necessary to have 
as large a pre-release pen as possible. The small pens used by SJÖÅSEN (1996) may have 
contributed to the high mortality experienced in the captive-bred stock at release.  The use of 
large pens encourages much more nocturnal activity and so fitness in the pre-release stock and 
so contributes to its survivability. 
 
3.3.2 Preparation of otters for release.  Before being taken to the release site the otters were 
given a final veterinary examination (JEFFERIES ET AL., 1985).  Also, a tiny identification tag or 
microtransponder was implanted in the upper hindquarters (for identification if killed on the 
road or recaptured later) and a blood sample taken for DNA analysis (later releases only).  At 
that time, when anaesthetised, a radio harness was fitted to the male of the group (first two 
releases only). 
 
3.3.3 The release technique. The so-called ‘soft’ release technique was considered best for 
these captive-bred animals.  For this, a small escape-proof release pen (9 x 15 metres) was 
built alongside the chosen river or stream and within ten metres of its bank.  The first pen was 
built on an island (JEFFERIES, 1984a).  An area with much vegetation cover was chosen, if 
possible.  Two sleeping boxes were placed in the pen, with a covered feeding trough so that 
they could continue to feel secure.  The first release pens were expensive structures with 
heavy, wooden fence posts, strong chain-link netting and steel overhangs to prevent climbing 
out.  Later releases used a much cheaper and re-usable electric fence which was found to be 
just as effective and enabled a larger (20 x 15 metres) pen to be built (WOODROFFE, 1993). 
 
The release groups remained in this release pen alongside the river for a period of 
three, later reduced to two, weeks.  It was considered that this would increase the chances of 
the animals feeling ‘at home’ on a river that they could smell and hear and thus would be 
more likely to settle down rather than scatter.  The second reason for the release pen is that 
food could be placed in it for 12 days after opening the door, in case their fishing ability was 
not adequate in the initial period after release. 
 
3.4  Area and release site selection 
 
3.4.1 Selection of the area for releases.  East Anglia was chosen for the main release scheme 
for several reasons:  
(a) The necessity to secure this rapidly decreasing population as soon as possible.  
(b) There had been several spraint surveys of the area so we knew where the surviving 
remnants of the wild population were.  
(c) It is close to the Otter Trust, and  


(d) Many of the otters in the Otter Trust’s breeding stock were of East Anglian origin 
(Section 3.2.2).  
 
3.4.2 Selection of release sites. Release sites needed to be as undisturbed and unpolluted as 
possible, with a good food supply, plenty of cover and potential holts. Also, each release 
needs to have the support of all the local riparian landowners and angling clubs.  The job of 
liaison has always been carried out by the conservation officer of the Trust.  With these 
criteria in mind, the individual release sites, with their breeding units of otters, should be 
inserted in the gaps between those few sites still occupied by the remaining wild otter stock.  
These were known for Norfolk and Suffolk from several previous spraint surveys.  It was 
hoped, and considered likely, that the progeny from these captive-bred foci would expand 
their range and coalesce, both with other inserts and with the remaining wild stock. 
 
 
On the other hand, however carefully the release site is chosen, it has to be said 
that when it comes to the final choice of position, the otter selects its own.  Although the 
position chosen by the conservationists may look ‘just right’ and be in the right position 
regarding future contact with the few remaining ‘wild’ otters, the released otters are quite 
capable of shifting position over many kilometres (JEFFERIES, 1989b).  Thus, CRAWFORD 
(2003) noted that in the north Norfolk area of Anglian Region where six otters had been 
released by the Otter Trust between 1987 and 1992, only one positive site with spraints was 
found out of 17 surveyed (in the surveys of 1991-1994 and 2000-2002).  This was due almost 
certainly to a change in watershed by both groups to the much larger Bure system to the east.  
No bodies were found and the disappearance from the River Glaven coincided with the 
occurrence of spraints on a nearby stretch of the River Bure (JESSOP AND CHEYNE, 1993).  
Also, otters are known to move between the Wensum and the Bure watersheds (JEFFERIES, 
1989b).  It should be remembered too, that the chosen release site is just the initial site.  This 
needs to be excellent, of course, in order to provide a good ‘send-off’’ but soon becomes 
irrelevant as the otters move out and feed over 39km of waterway (JEFFERIES ET AL., 1986). 
 
3.4.3 Selection of the initial release site. A survey of potential rivers and release sites was 
made in the early 1980s and the River Black Bourn, a tributary of the Little Ouse on the 
Norfolk/Suffolk border was chosen as the best.  It was not inhabited by otters but wild otters 
were present in an adjacent area.  Cover was very good with several alder carrs and the 
riparian landowners were extremely co-operative.  There was a good food supply with 
abundant coarse fish, such as chub (Leuciscus cephalus), dace (L. leuciscus) and pike (Esox 
lucius).  Also, the water appeared clear and unpolluted.  Nevertheless, a sample of chub was 
caught and analysed by gas-liquid chromatography (JEFFERIES AND FREESTONE, 1985).  Low 
concentrations of gamma BHC (lindane), pp-DDE (the metabolite of DDT), PCBs and 
mercury were found, but no dieldrin (the cause of the otters decline in the first place; 
JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 2002).  However, most waterways flowing through agricultural East 
Anglia would, at that time, have contained some pollution with agricultural chemicals and, as 
these residues were considered low from previous experience, it was decided that they did not 
outweigh the advantages of the site. 
 
 
4   THE INITIAL RELEASE IN 1983 
 
The release pen door was fixed open at 20.00 h. (GMT) on 5 July 1983 and the otters left that 
night.  The Otter Trust conservation officer, Rowena Jessop, took turns with DJJ and Tony 
Mitchell-Jones in the nightly radio-tracking.  The otters were almost completely nocturnal, 


emerging within an hour either side of sunset and retiring around 06.00 h. (GMT) (JEFFERIES 
ET AL., 1986).  They returned to the release pen to feed during nights 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7, but after 
that food was untouched and the pen neglected.  It was thought from the appearance of 
spraints, that they were catching wild fish from day four (analysis of the spraints from the 
second release group showed that they fed on cyprinids, eels (Anguilla anguilla) and pike 
soon after release (MACGUIRE, 1989)). 
 
The group were radio-tracked through the male for a period of 50 days until 24 
August, when the harness disintegrated and was retrieved (JEFFERIES ET AL., 1986).  After that, 
their expanding range was tracked by spraints and footprints.  At 50, 94, 163 and 350 days the 
total known linear home range was 15.33, 25.63, 35.51 and 39.20 km, respectively (a final 
total of ca. 39 kilometres [24.4 miles]).  Breeding was confirmed on 13 August 1984, when 
cub prints were found with those of the parent female at a distance of 3.15 km from the 
release site (JEFFERIES, 1984b).  The descendants of the first released otters are still present on 
the River Black Bourn, which has not been empty of otters since the first one was released 21 
years ago (long after the original otters would have died of old age or accident). 
 
 
5   LATER RELEASES 
 
5.1  Releases of captive-bred otters to East Anglia by the Otter Trust 
The first release was followed by 23 others making a total of 58 otters released to the 
originally planned area of reinforcement of remnant wild stock by captive-bred animals.  
These consisted of 27 males and 31 females with 34 going to Norfolk, 14 to Suffolk and four 
to east Essex, with another six on the Hertfordshire/West Essex border.  All these were 
released between 1983 and 1996 (Table 1). 


 
 
5.2  Releases of captive-bred otters to the East Midlands by the Otter Trust 
Although not an original part of the planned release experiment, the Otter Trust released a 
further 29 otters to the East Midland counties of Cambridgeshire (4 otters), Bedfordshire (10), 
Northamptonshire (8) and Rutland (7) between 1994 and 1998.  These counties border the 
East Anglian counties to the west and have been largely devoid of otters for many years, 
though small fragments remained on the Rivers Nene and Great Ouse (LENTON, CHANIN AND 
JEFFERIES, 1980) (Table 1). 
 
5.3  Releases of captive-bred otters to southern English counties by the Otter Trust 
A total of 13 captive-bred otters were released to rivers (Wylye, Bybrook, Stour and Itchen) in 
southern England (Wiltshire, Dorset, Hampshire) between 1989 and 1994 in advance of the 
natural expansion from the west (Table 1). 
 
5.4  Release of captive-bred otters to the Upper Thames by the Otter Trust 
The Thames Region had remained empty of otters since the early days following the 
population crash of 1957.  Seventeen otters were released by the Otter Trust in 1999 (the last 
of the release programme) to the upper Thames area being studied by the WildCRU team 
from Oxford University (Table 1). 
 
5.5  Total captive-bred otters released 
The Otter Trust released a total of 117 captive-bred otters to southern and south eastern 
England in a series of 38 release groups between 1983 and 1999 (Table 1 & JEFFERIES, 
WAYRE AND SHUTER, 2001). 
 


 
6   BREEDING 
 
Breeding was determined by cubs being seen or their footprints found at nearly all of the 
release sites used.  At many sites, e.g. the River Black Bourn, sightings of females with cubs 
were made every year.  Sometimes it could be seen that both released females had bred 
(JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 1988; RIDDING and SMITH, 1988).  Many records of breeding have 
been catalogued in detail by JESSOP AND CHEYNE (1993) and STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES 
(1996).  The Otter Trust had recorded 55 incidents of breeding from 36 of their release groups 
and subsequent generations by the end of 1996 (WAYRE in GREEN, 1997). 
 
 
7   MORTALITY 
 
At the time of the first releases, e.g. Minsmere in 1985, the individuals, their breeding success 
and their accidental deaths could be followed quite easily as they were the only otters in the 
immediate area (JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 1988, 1991).  During these early years, when 55 had 
been released up to 1993, the numbers of known casualties were low. JESSOP AND CHEYNE 
(1993) and STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES (1996) listed six as traffic accidents (11%), two as fyke 
net casualties (4%) and one due to fighting.  Later, when the population was starting to 
recover and increase with merging of the releases and progeny of earlier releases, deaths could 
not be attributed so easily to particular release groups unless a body was scanned with a 
microchip reader and found to be positive.  We are aware of around 70 other otter deaths 
(besides the above nine) in the whole release area (East Anglia & East Midlands) since the 
start of the programme in 1983.  None were tagged.  All but four of these were caused by road 
traffic accidents.  Two of the others were cubs seen floating down a flooded river and 
drowned while the last two were senile.  It is likely that many or most of this 70 would have 
been the progeny (F1, F2 and later generations) of the released animals.  Many recent bodies 
have been analysed in respect to their DNA and in due course it is hoped that this work will 
provide the concluding evidence.  Only five otter bodies have been recovered containing 
microtransponder tags since 1993 (i.e. part of the original release stock) and all these were 
from road casualties at different sites on the Upper Thames.  These all derive from the 1999 
release of 17 otters to that area. 
 
The problem of road traffic mortality, not only to release programmes but to the otter 
population at large, is of much concern.  SHUTER (1996) has reported the rapidly increasing 
incidence of road traffic accidents to otters in East Anglia.  These increases are indicative of a 
rapidly increasing otter population (and so a successful release programme) as well as 
increasing traffic density. 
 
 
8   SUCCESS IN EAST ANGLIA 
   
 
The only real criterion for the success of any release programme is the measurable long-term 
presence of breeding populations occupying the chosen release area with some expansion at 
its conclusion over the Region as a whole.  There is no doubt that most of the released otters 
have bred successfully and that nearly all of the chosen release sites are still occupied (some 
after 21 years).  There are also the easily visible signs of expansion, particularly southwards 


into Essex, which received few releases.  They may even have crossed the Thames estuary 
into Kent. 
 
8.1  Success in terms of percentage occupation of sites 
The decline of the East Anglian otter population, the timing of its nadir and the extremely 
rapid recovery can be followed for the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex with some 
accuracy and in some detail.  This is due to a series of county spraint and bridge surveys 
carried out by the Suffolk Naturalists Society, Essex University and the Otter Trust from 1969 
to 1989 (WEST, 1975; MACDONALD AND MASON, 1976; CLAYTON AND JACKSON, 1981; 
JESSOP, 1985; JESSOP AND MACGUIRE, 1990), the three national spraint surveys of 1977-79, 
1984-86 and 1991-94 (LENTON, CHANIN AND JEFFERIES, 1980; STRACHAN ET AL., 1990; 
STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996) and, more recently, the comprehensive surveys of the three 
counties carried out in 1997 (BULLION, 1997; MACDONALD AND MASON, 1997; YAXLEY, 
1997). 
 
Together, these provide a remarkable series (Figure 1).  They show the decline in 
Norfolk to the point in 1985 when in the national survey only one of Norfolk’s two positive 
sites was of wild-born stock (on the River Wissey), whilst the other derived from the Otter 
Trust’s release on the River Thet in 1984.  Thus, the Norfolk population had declined to 
virtual extinction on the surveyed rivers by 1984-86. The following remarkably sudden and 
rapid recovery from this low point to 34.0% occupation in 1997 can be seen quite clearly.  The 
start of this recovery coincides with the start of releases. 
 
In Suffolk, the Otter Trust’s bridge survey of 1984 showed no occupied sites in the 
whole county at that date (JESSOP, 1985).  However, as with Norfolk, there followed a rapid 
recovery to 21.8% occupation in 1997, the start of which again coincided with the release 
scheme in that county. 
 
No occupied sites were found in Essex in the 1984-86 national survey but by that of 
1991-94 otter presence had risen to 10.4%, partly from the single release [4 otters to Hamford 
Water in 1996 (JEFFERIES, WAYRE AND SHUTER, 2001)] and partly by movement across the 
county border from Suffolk.  By 1997 occupation had risen to 35.1% over the whole county. 
 
The fourth otter survey of England was carried out over 2000-2002 by 25 surveyors 
and analysed by CRAWFORD (2003) in terms of percentage occupation of sites in the old 
National Rivers Authority (NRA) Regions and in LEAP (Local Environment Agency Plan) 
Areas.  The county percentage occupation data are not available but the high percentage 
occupation of important LEAP areas strongly suggests that otter occupation was still 
increasing in the East Anglian release areas into the 21st century.  Thus, the ‘Broadland 
Rivers’ LEAP area on the Norfolk/Suffolk border showed 26/71 = 37% occupation (19% in 
1991-1994) and the ‘East Suffolk’ LEAP area showed 24/60 = 40% occupation (17% in 1991-
1994).  It should be remembered that the national survey only covered alternate 50 kilometre 
squares of the national grid in each county, whereas the 1997 surveys covered the whole 
counties and would give a greater degree of accuracy concerning the whole picture. 
 
8.2  Success in terms of numbers present 
A method of estimating numbers of otters inhabiting Regions and countries at various times in 
the past was developed by DJJ using data from the national surveys (percentage site 
occupation), the lengths of waterway available (HARRIS ET AL., 1995) and from radio-tracking 
studies (minimum polygons/waterway lengths inhabited) (GREEN, GREEN AND JEFFERIES, 
1984; JEFFERIES ET AL., 1986).  This has been detailed by JEFFERIES, STRACHAN AND 
STRACHAN (2003b). Calculations made by using this method suggested that the total 
population of adult otters in England was around 228, 359, 977 and 1600 in 1977-1979, 1984-


1986, 1991-1994 and 2000-2002, respectively.  Similar calculations of the numbers of adult 
otters present in the National Rivers Authority (NRA) Anglian Region (which includes 
Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex, together with Lincolnshire and part of the East Midlands, 
Cambridgeshire, Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire) at these dates suggested totals of 29, 
decreasing to 12 in 1984-1986 (only 7 of these being ‘wild’ natives), increasing to 75 with 
releases and then expanding to 241 by 2000-2002.  The calculated total of seven ‘wild’ otters 
in the largest NRA Region of England (around 27,000 square kilometres and over 20% of the 
country) shows how low the Anglian population had become before attempts were made to 
reinforce it.  What was left was fragmented into a few well-separated ‘islands’ and was 
obviously non-viable being too dispersed to make contact. 
 
The total number of Otter Trust otters released to the old NRA Anglian Region 
between 1983-1998 was 81, together with 16 rehabilitated otters from the Vincent Wildlife 
Trust (VWT) (to Lincolnshire) in 1994 and 1995 and two otters from the RSPCA released to 
north Essex in 2000, making 99 in all (JEFFERIES, WAYRE AND SHUTER, 2001; CRAWFORD, 
2003).  If the possible seven original ‘wild’ otters are included from 1984, this would make 
106 known otters multiplying by 2.27 to produce the calculated 241 otters in a median release 
time of around eight years (1983 to 2000 divided by 2).  This may seem a very low and slow 
return but it is actually slightly greater than that achieved by the recovering and re-occupying 
‘wild’ population of the west.  Thus, the percentage occupation of survey sites (and so the area 
occupied) in England approximately doubled every seven years between surveys; 5.8% to 
9.7% to 23.4% between 1977-1979 to 1984-1986 to 1991-1994 (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 
1996).  Also, doubling the calculated 228 adult otters in England in 1977-1979 every seven 
years to 456 (1984-1986), to 912 (1991-1994) and 1824 (1998-2000) again approximates to 
the numbers actually calculated as being present.  It is possible that the recovery rate in 
Anglian Region was slightly greater than in the west.  Indeed, the calculated Anglian 
percentage of the national population increased from 7.7% to 15.1% of the total between 
1991-1994 and 2000-2002.  The above similarities in the numbers, known and calculated, 
increase confidence in the method used.   
 
 
9   SUCCESS IN THE EAST MIDLANDS 
 
The releases of 29 captive-bred otters to the East Midland counties of Rutland, 
Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire and Cambridgeshire were made between the national otter 
surveys of 1991-1994 and 2000-2002.  The subsequent changes in site occupation at the latter 
survey were very marked.  Thus, occupation of sites in the Welland, Nene, Ely Ouse and 
Bedford Ouse LEAPS increased from 1/26 to 16/26, from 5/24 to 14/24, from 10/30 to 14/30 
and from 1/45 to 11/45, respectively (CRAWFORD, 2003).  Rivers like the Welland, Gwash and 
Chater were occupied for the first time in three decades.  Overall, otter presence increased 
from 17/125 sites (13.6% occupation) to 55/125 sites (44.0% occupation) that is over three 
times the earlier level in only ten years, compared to the national increase from 22.1% to 
34.2% occupation in the same time (CRAWFORD, 2003). 
 
Areas immediately to the west of these newly occupied rivers are still empty of otters 
so the increase could only have been generated by the released otters and the few relicts.  It is 
likely that the release of otters to the adjacent counties to the main East Anglian release area, 
albeit at a lower density, actually formed an integral part of that release programme.  It would 
have contributed greatly to the success of the main project in that the presence of otters to the 
west would have prevented the young otters bred in Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex from leaking 


away in that direction.  It would have helped concentrate them where they could best increase 
the occupation density in the east. 
 
 
10   SUCCESS IN SOUTHERN ENGLAND 
 
The small scale experimental placing or seeding of four release groups in the path of the 
expanding ‘front’ has shown some sign of success.  Thus, the sudden increase in the rate of 
recovery in part of Wessex Region between the national surveys of 1984-1986 and 1991-1994 
appears to have been due to the addition of this stock (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996).  As 
the ‘front’ too ‘leapfrogs’ forward more than the usual 3.6km in a year, this is one of the few 
working techniques for speeding up the ‘natural’ rate of reoccupation.  The released otters 
could have been taken from behind the front to achieve this same increase in rate, rather than 
captive-bred releases, thus eliminating any genetic changes. 
 
 
11   THE VARIANT RELEASE OF REHABILITATED OTTERS TO NORTH EASTERN 
ENGLAND BY THE VWT 
 
As reported in the Introduction, the VWT release programme used rehabilitated otters rather 
than captive-breeding.  Their main effort was concentrated in North Yorkshire, where 21 
animals were released to the River Derwent and a further four to the River Esk between 1990 
and 1993 (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996; GREEN, 1997; CRAWFORD, 2003).  The whole 
Yorkshire Region had been only 2.22% occupied at the national survey of 1984-1986.  This 
increased to 10.37% in 1991-1994 during the period when the releases started and reached 
23.94% in 2000-2002 (STRACHAN ET AL., 1990; STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996; CRAWFORD, 
2003).  Detailed surveying of the whole area since the survey of 1991-1994 has shown that the 
otters have now spread and colonised the whole 2,057 square kilometres of the River Derwent 
Catchment and beyond.  The whole 42 kilometre length of the River Esk is also occupied 
(WOODROFFE, 1996).  Otters have recently been seen swimming out of the Esk to sea at 
Whitby Harbour and their occupation of the Esk LEAP area has increased from 3/25 sites 
(12%) in 1991-1994 to 20/25 sites (80%) in 2000-2002 (CRAWFORD, 2003).  The improved 
situation in the Derwent, and to a lesser extent the Esk, is probably wholly due to the VWT 
restocking programme (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996). 
 
A further total of 16 rehabilitated otters were released by the VWT to the county of 
Lincolnshire within the Anglian Region in 1994 and 1995 (GREEN, 1997; CRAWFORD, 2003).  
Occupation of sites in the Louth Coastal LEAP area increased from 0/50 sites in 1991-1994 to 
24/50 sites (48%) in 2000-2002 (CRAWFORD, 2003). 
 
The source of these otters was largely Scotland, and again they were released at a 
mean age of 18.3 months.  Considerable publicity and much searching produced only a few 
bodies of microtransponder-tagged otters.  Two males were drowned in a single illegally set 
fyke net in 1992 (WOODROFFE, 1993).  This is an easily avoided but common cause of death 
(JEFFERIES, GREEN AND GREEN, 1984).  A female was killed in a road traffic accident.  A 
fourth was the victim of trauma.  One plus point of releasing rehabilitated otters, of course, is 
that it uses to advantage and returns otters to the field which otherwise would have died.  
Concentrating their positions of release means that their environmental effect can be 
maximised.  
 
 


 
12    CONCLUSIONS 
 
12.1  The national value of restocking and re-introduction of otters 
The re-building of the East Anglian otter population by the Otter Trust in the 1980s and 1990s 
ranks as one of the very few instances when the progeny from a captive breeding programme 
have actually been released into the field as intended and successfully fulfilled the original 
aims.  Indeed, the eminent ecologist Graeme Caughley wrote in 1994 that the Otter Trust 
releases represent one of only five such captive breeding programmes successfully returning 
an endangered species to the wild at that time. 
 
There is no doubt that the Otter Trust bred otters were the instrument which re-built 
the eastern population as there was nowhere else from which recruitment could have come.  
The national surveys showed that the Midlands and Thames watershed were largely 
unoccupied by otters in the mid 1980s.  The three independent surveyors for the 1996-97 
Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex surveys agree with this in their reports (YAXLEY, 1997; BULLION, 
1997; MACDONALD AND MASON, 1997).  Also, the rate of population expansion here was 
much greater than in those areas which depended solely on local breeding of the few 
remaining wild otters alone. 
 
The full positive effect of the releases on the East Anglian otter population can be 
measured by its comparison with the history of an area where releases have not been carried 
out, i.e. Kent and Sussex in the south eastern ‘corner’ of Southern Region.  This area was in a 
similar position to that of East Anglia at the time of the 1984-1986 survey.  Here, there is a 
large gap between the very few occupied sites and the next ones at the far western end of the 
Region.  So, natural recolonisation has not happened yet and is still unlikely for many years 
despite the ‘crash’ having occurred 47 years ago! There were 3/169 (1.78%) occupied sites in 
1984-1986 (STRACHAN ET AL., 1990) and still only 4/169 (2.37%) in 2000-2002 (CRAWFORD, 
2003).  The number of occupied areas is probably the same as two of the four recent occupied 
sites are close together making three widely dispersed occupied areas.  So, the situation, 
unlike that of East Anglia, is poor and unchanged. As the two surveys are 16 years apart, 
survival so far is surprising and in the long term doubtful.  The level of inbreeding must be 
very high if there is more than one survivor per site. 
 
In addition to the worthwhile conservation success in re-populating East Anglia we 
have demonstrated that the technique works and it does not need vast numbers of otters.  It 
can be held in reserve for the next time that the British population is threatened.  Nobody can 
foresee when or from which direction such future problems may arrive.  One of the 
conservation reasons for releasing otters is to hasten the end point of a recovered population.  
While a population remains abnormally small, unevenly distributed and recovering as slowly 
as that of the southern British otter population, it is vulnerable to any new negative factor such 
as a disease epizootic.  The faster the population recovers the better. 
 
With regard to the supposed problems of using this conservation tool it can be said of 
the British experience that: 
 
(1) Inbreeding in the captive-bred stock can be avoided and is much less than that 
occurring in the field in the remnant population fragments (JEFFERIES, in press). 
 
(2) No otters or their progeny were known to have died from environmental 
contamination in any of these release programmes although many were post mortemed and 
analysed (JEFFERIES, 1985; JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 1988, 1991, 2002). 
 
(3) All the techniques used here involved prolonged maintenance of the release stock 
in captivity to 18 months.  This allows a very long quarantine period which, together with 


veterinary examination just before release, greatly reduces or eliminates the possibility of 
introducing a communicable disease into the field. 
 
(4) Road mortality is a serious problem in the ‘wild’ otter population of the west and 
there is no indication that it is worse in the captive-bred and released otters. 
 
12.2  A controversial subject 
The above success was achieved against pressure from detractors, who said that releases 
would not work and that the East Anglian rivers were still too polluted for otters to survive 
and breed in the 1980s (MASON, 1991, 1992, 1995).  However, a long (from 1962 onwards) 
series of analyses of British otter bodies for organochlorine insecticides and PCBs (JEFFERIES 
AND HANSON, 2002) had shown a considerable decline in the levels of the most toxic 
materials, aldrin and dieldrin, and that otter contamination with PCBs was lower in East 
Anglia than anywhere else in Britain.  To check the potential pollution problem any otter 
bodies found in the release area were analysed (JEFFERIES, 1985; JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 
1988, 1991) as well as fish from the release site (JEFFERIES AND FREESTONE, 1985).  Much 
past experience (DJJ) in the Nature Conservancy’s Toxic Chemicals and Wildlife Section 
suggested that the levels found during the Otter Trust release programme were not going to be 
detrimentally harmful to individuals or populations.  Indeed, the initial release had extra value 
as a successful test ‘probe’ (Section 12.4). 
   
It was also said that otters from the south west and Wales would soon have moved 
across Britain and re-populated the eastern counties ‘naturally’, so making the release scheme 
unnecessary.  However, it should be remembered that when the project was first mooted, 
planned and started, conservationists only had the results of the first, 1977-79, survey to hand 
and this showed only a very small English population and no sign of recovery anywhere.  
Also, local surveys showed clearly that the East Anglian population was still declining 
rapidly.  By the time that the second national survey of 1984-86 was completed and analysed 
and some recovery in the west was demonstrated, the Otter Trust release project had already 
started and was shown to be successful in 1983.  By the time of the third national survey in 
1991-94 we could see that the western breeding population was indeed moving eastwards, but 
only at a rate of 3.6 km a year (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996) and over a considerable 
distance.  For example, the whole of Thames Region, to the south west of Anglian Region, 
remained empty of otters until a few were shown to be present at the western end in 1992.  If 
we had not released otters to East Anglia, that population would have disappeared in 1986 
together with all traces of its original genetic constitution built up over millennia.  There could 
still be no otters in Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex at the time of writing (2004). 
 
12.3 The wider discussion 
The subject of re-introductions, and even reinforcements, has always been a controversial one 
for conservationists.  Should one do it or accept the loss, natural or not?  There has been much 
discussion regarding the otter in western continental Europe (DE JONGH, 1998, REUTHER, 
1998, KRANZ, 1999) where the decline, fragmentation and crash of some national populations 
in the 20th century has perhaps been more severe than in Britain (MITCHELL-JONES ET AL., 
1999; REUTHER ET AL., 2000).  The need for re-introduction exercises seems to us to be even 
more obvious on the continent than it was in eastern England.  The very large gaps between 
remnants, albeit large remnants, and the extremely slow rates of increase and re-occupation 
(reference this paper and STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996) for the species render recovery of 
its original distribution by natural expansion impossibly distant into the future.  The necessary 
time could perhaps be measured more in centuries than decades.  True, the European otter is 
perhaps no longer a “high priority” species (KRANZ, 1999) because of hard work in the past by 


conservationists, and most of the continental “populations are large enough to survive without 
having contact” (KRANZ, 1999), but where does one draw the line each time on the level of 
depreciation which is acceptable.  The spectre of the next serious threat to the species 
occurring long before full recovery from the last is ever present.  The stronger the population 
at that point, the more likely is it to survive any new threat. 
 
Perhaps a true ‘precautionary tale’ about the red squirrel (Sciurus vulgaris) may 
illustrate the point.  This species became extinct in Ireland and southern Scotland by the early 
18th century and became rare in the Scottish Highlands by the late 18th and early 19th centuries.  
This was probably due to years of low seed yields becoming synchronised in important food 
trees.  It was later re-introduced from England by early conservationists to ten sites in 
Scotland between 1772 and 1782 and to ten sites in Ireland between 1815 and 1856.  The 
species then became very abundant between 1890 and 1910 throughout the British Isles.  The 
subsequent decline of the red squirrel population starting between 1910 and 1930 and the 
gradual extinction over most of England and Wales during the mid to late 20th century is well 
known (GURNELL, 1991).  Without the timely foresight of those pioneer re-introductionists 
over 230 years ago the species and its British gene pool could have been completely lost to 
Britain by now.  Could the conservationists of 2234 say the same of the continental otter? 
 
One of the conservation reasons for releasing otters is to hasten the end point of a 
recovered population.  While a population remains abnormally small, unevenly distributed 
and recovering as slowly as that of the southern British otter population, it is vulnerable to any 
new negative factor such as a disease epizootic.  The faster the population recovers the better. 
 
In addition to this worthwhile success we have demonstrated that the technique works.  
It is the only way, other than by releasing rehabilitated or captured animals, that much of 
western and central Europe can be re-populated with otters.  Also, it can be held in reserve for 
the next time that the British population is threatened.  No one body can foresee when or from 
which direction future problems may arrive. 
 
12.4  Secondary information gained 
It is worthwhile noting that the Otter Trust release scheme and its results threw new light on 
several interesting facets of otter biology and conservation: 
 
(a) First, the initial release also acted incidentally as a test ‘probe’, as suggested by 
CAUGHLEY (1984).  It showed, as early as 1983, that the rivers of Norfolk and Suffolk, 
although still polluted, were even then clean enough to support otters again.  The only reason 
they did not have any was that, because of the fragmentation of the remnant population, there 
were no otters about to re-occupy them.  This was invaluable information to conservationists 
at the time.   
 
(b) Secondly, the release programme showed that the East Anglian population could 
be re-built by the addition of only 52 individual otters over 14 years (1983 to 1996) (Table 1).  
When we started this programme we did not know how many otters it might take to reinforce 
and repopulate the three counties, which appeared almost empty at the time.  Indeed, Figure 1 
shows that the turn round from decline to increase and a ‘healthy’ population had already been 
reached as early as 1993 (11 years) with the addition of only 37 new animals.  This is a 
remarkably small number and well below the number predicted to be necessary by detractors 
of the programme.  The large effect of placing a mere 37 young otters into East Anglia over 
11 years provides a useful insight into the potential effect of removing 123 adult otters over 
only ten years, as occurred when the Eastern Counties Otter Hounds killed this number in 
Norfolk and Suffolk out of a small and rapidly dwindling population between 1957 and 1966.  
The 37 place this mortality in its correct perspective and add weight to the concern expressed 
over the rapidly rising mortality from road traffic accidents (Section 12.5). 


 
(c) In addition to its value for otter conservation the releasing of otters provided 
valuable evidence of the side-effects of their absence and presence on Britain’s other native 
and alien riparian fauna by acting as unplanned, natural experiments.  Earlier otter survey 
results (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996) had suggested that populations of introduced 
American mink (Mustela vison) were reduced or eliminated by incoming otters. However, this 
was demonstrated unequivocably by the insertion of eight otters to the River Nene and 
tributaries in Northamptonshire (in the Otter Trust East Midland releases) over 1994 and 
1995.  The sudden presence of a ‘ready-made’ high density riverine otter population in the 
area caused an equally sudden disappearance of the mink population (JEFFERIES, STRACHAN 
AND STRACHAN, 2000).  This was confirmed by a second release of an even larger group of 17 
otters to the upper River Thames by the Otter Trust in 1999 (Section 5.4) (JEFFERIES, 
STRACHAN AND STRACHAN, 2003a).  The reduction of the mink population is important 
because this species is presently eliminating the remnants of the water vole (Arvicola 
terrestris) population from British rivers by predation (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1993). 
 
12.5  Road mortality losses 
It is clear that road traffic accidents are the greatest cause of otter deaths today, though, of 
course, these are the most easily found bodies.  Thus, the above (Section 7) known road 
mortality of around 66 otters in the whole East Anglian and East Midlands release area during 
the second half of the Otter Trust release programme suggests that their loss was the main 
reason for the slow rate of population expansion experienced (i.e. x 2.27 in 8 years; Section 
8.2) and emphasises the size of the problem. It is a problem, not only for any re-introduction 
programme (it increases the numbers which have to be released) but for the recovery of the 
otter population at large and is of much concern. 
 
SHUTER (1996) has reported the increasing incidence of road traffic accidents to otters 
in East Anglia.  This increase is an indicator of a rapidly increasing otter population (i.e. a 
successful release project, as otters have to be there to be killed) as well as of increasing 
traffic density.  However, there are worrying indications that as the otter density has increased 
over the years in East Anglia then the proportion of the population killed on the roads appears 
to have increased too.  Thus, only 4% (1/25 released up to 1993) of the early VWT releases in 
North Yorkshire between 1990 and 1993 were road traffic victims (Section 11; STRACHAN 
AND JEFFERIES, 1996) and 11% (6/55 released up to 1993) of the Otter Trust releases were 
killed on the road in the first ten years to 1993 (Section 7).  After 1993, however, there was an 
increasing annual mortality (SHUTER, 1996) leading to a total of around 66 (i.e. 70 - 4 other 
causes) casualties in the overall Otter Trust East Anglia/East Midlands release area by 1999 
(Section 7).  If this number is related to the estimated regional otter population of 241 by 2000 
(Section 8.2; JEFFERIES, STRACHAN AND STRACHAN, 2003b) this makes a road mortality rate 
of 27%.  By 1999 the release of 17 otters within a small area of the Upper Thames resulted in 
29% casualties (5/17; Sections 7 & 5.4). 
 
Is this increasing proportion simply a problem of traffic density increasing at a greater 
rate than the otter population, or is there a secondary reason, i.e. perhaps otters moved about 
less when their density was very low in the release area in the 1980s?  Perhaps greater otter 
densities stimulate greater movement by the shifting of juveniles out of the natal area.  A 
probable example of this resulting in a road casualty was seen in the Minsmere release area in 
1990 (JEFFERIES AND HANSON, 1991).  Again, some support for this theory is provided by the 
fact that there is a preponderance of males in otter road casualty data (MACDONALD, PHOLCOX 
AND GROGAN, 1999; PAL, 2004) and males move more and greater distances than females 
(GREEN, GREEN AND JEFFERIES, 1984). 


 
Despite this high, and possibly increasing, road mortality the otter population is still 
increasing, both in East Anglia (JEFFERIES, WAYRE AND SHUTER, 2001) and nationally 
(JEFFERIES, STRACHAN AND STRACHAN, 2003b; CRAWFORD, 2003).  Whether this would still 
be so if the proportion of the otter population dying on the road increases beyond a critical 
level is not known.  A decreasing differential between otter road mortality and otter 
productivity could be the reason for the lower than calculated (STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 
1996) potential increase in site occupation between the 1991-1994 and 2000-2004 
(CRAWFORD, 2003) surveys.  However, although large numbers of otters are killed on the 
roads of Shetland, where they live at their highest densities in Britain, the population has 
remained viable (J.W.H. CONROY, Personal communication).  
 
Some support for the above worryingly high estimated road accident rates for otters is 
given by the badger (Meles meles) in Britain, in which a rate of 20% (50,000 casualties/year) 
was calculated for 1992 from a larger data base (HARRIS ET AL., 1992).  This mustelid too is 
able to cope with this level of road casualties and still have a rapidly increasing population 
(CRESSWELL, HARRIS AND JEFFERIES, 1990; WILSON, HARRIS AND MCLAREN, 1997).  
However, wherever possible it would seem advisable to set otter re-introduction projects in 
countryside with low road and traffic densities in order to maximise useful productivity in the 
valuable early years of a release scheme.  This was the case for the first 1983 release in 
Suffolk (Section 4) in which no known road casualties occurred and is still one of the most 
successful recolonisation projects (JEFFERIES ET AL., 1986)  
 
 
13   REFERENCES 
 
BULLION, S. 1997. East Anglian Otter Survey: The Suffolk Rivers 1996-1997. Suffolk Wildlife Trust, The 
Environment Agency, Ipswich. 
CAUGHLEY, G. 1984. Directions in conservation biology. Journal of Animal Ecology, 63: 215-244. 
CHANIN, P.R.F. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1978. The decline of the otter Lutra lutra L. in Britain: an analysis of 
hunting records and discussion of causes. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 10: 305-328. 
CLAYTON, C.J. & JACKSON, M.J. 1981. Norfolk Otter Survey 1980-1981. Journal of the Otter Trust, 1 (4) 
1980: 16-22. 
CRAWFORD, A. 2003. Fourth Otter Survey of England 2000-2002. The Environment Agency, Bristol. 
CRESSWELL, P., HARRIS, S. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1990. The History, Distribution, Status and Habitat 
Requirements of the Badger in Britain. Nature Conservancy Council, Peterborough. 
DE JONGH, A.W.J.J. 1998. Re-introduction of otters - support or risk for otter conservation? IUCN Otter 
Specialist Group Bulletin, 15: 80-86. 
GREEN, R. 1997. Re-introduction of otters - a successful conservation strategy? IUCN Otter Specialist Group 
Bulletin, 14: 62-74. 
GREEN, J., GREEN, R. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1984. A radio-tracking survey of otters Lutra lutra on a Perthshire 
river system. Lutra, 27: 85-145. 
GURNELL, J. 1991. Red Squirrel Sciurus vulgaris. In: The Handbook of British Mammals. [3rd edition] (Edited 
by Corbet, G.B. & Harris, S.) Pp 177-186. Blackwell. Oxford. 
HARRIS, S., CRESSWELL, W., REASON, P. & CRESSWELL, P. 1992. An integrated approach to monitoring 
badger (Meles meles) population changes in Britain. In: Wildlife 2001: Populations. (Edited by McCullough, 
D.R. & Barrett, R.H.) Pp 945-953. Elsevier Applied Science, London. 
HARRIS, S., MORRIS, P., WRAY, S. & YALDEN, D. 1995. A Review of British Mammals: Estimates and 
Conservation Status of British Mammals other than Cetaceans. Joint Nature Conservation Committee, 
Peterborough. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. 1984a. The otters return. Natural World, 11: 10-12. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. 1984b. Otters update. Natural World, 12: 37. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. 1985. An otter casualty from Breydon Water, Norfolk. Journal of the Otter Trust, 1 (8) 1984: 
23-24. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. 1989a. The changing otter population of Britain 1700-1989. Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 38: 61-69. 


JEFFERIES, D.J. 1989b. Otters crossing watersheds. Journal of the Otter Trust, 2 (2) 1988: 17-19. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. 1989c. Fragmentation of the English otter population and its effect on viability. Journal of the 
Otter Trust, 2 (2) 1988: 20-22. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. 1996. Decline and recovery of the otter - a personal account. British Wildlife, 7: 353-364. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. in press. Rebuilding a wild population of the European otter by releasing captive-bred stock: Is 
there a problem with inbreeding and outbreeding? Journal of the Otter Trust. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. & FREESTONE, P. 1985. Chemical analysis of some coarse fish from a Suffolk river carried out 
as part of the preparation for the first release of captive-bred otters. Journal of the Otter Trust, 1 (8) 1984: 17-22. 
JEFFERIES, D.J., GREEN, J. & GREEN, R. 1984. Commercial Fish and Crustacean Traps: a Serious Cause of 
Otter Lutra lutra (L.) Mortality in Britain and Europe. Vincent Wildlife Trust, London.   
JEFFERIES, D.J. & HANSON, H.M. 1988. The Minsmere otter release and information gained from a detailed 
examination and analysis of the two casualties. Journal of the Otter Trust, 2 (1) 1987: 19-29. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. & HANSON, H.M. 1991. Evidence of fighting in a juvenile male otter road casualty bred from 
the otters released at Minsmere in 1985 and 1987. Journal of the Otter Trust, 2 (4) 1990: 13-24.  
JEFFERIES, D.J. & HANSON, H.M. 2002. The role of dieldrin in the decline of the otter (Lutra lutra) in Britain: 
The Analytical data. In: The Proceedings of the First Otter Toxicology Conference, Skye, September 2000 
(Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, P. & Gutleb, A.C.) International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Skye. 
Journal of the International Otter Survival Fund, No. 1, 95-144. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. & MITCHELL-JONES, A.J. 1982. Preliminary research for a release programme for the 
European otter. Journal of the Otter Trust, 1 (5) 1981: 13-16. 
JEFFERIES, D.J., STRACHAN, C. & STRACHAN, R. 2000. The water vole: marked changes in status in 
Northamptonshire and Peterborough during the twentieth century. Wildlife of Northamptonshire and the Soke of 
Peterborough, 1: 33-38. 
JEFFERIES, D.J., STRACHAN, R. & STRACHAN, C. 2003a. Interactions between the three species. In: The Water 
Vole and Mink Survey of Britain 1996-1998 with a History of the Long-term Changes in the Status of Both 
Species and their Causes. (Edited by Jefferies, D.J.) Pp 165-187. The Vincent Wildlife Trust, Ledbury. 
JEFFERIES, D.J., STRACHAN, C. & STRACHAN, R. 2003b.  Estimated numbers of the three interacting riparian 
mammals in Britain using survey data. In: The Water Vole and Mink Survey of Britain 1996-1998 with a History 
of the Long-term Changes in the Status of Both Species and their Causes. (Edited by Jefferies, D.J.)  Pp 188-
199. The Vincent Wildlife Trust, Ledbury. 
JEFFERIES, D.J. & WAYRE, P. 1984. Re-introduction to the wild of otters bred in captivity. Journal of the Otter 
Trust, 1 (7) 1983: 20-22. 
JEFFERIES, D.J., WAYRE, P., JESSOP, R.M., MITCHELL-JONES, A.J. & MEDD, R. 1985. The composition, age, 
size and pre-release treatment of the groups of otters Lutra lutra used in the first releases of captive-bred stock in 
England. Journal of the Otter Trust, 1 (8) 1984: 11-16. 
JEFFERIES, D.J., WAYRE, P., JESSOP, R.M. & MITCHELL-JONES, A.J. 1986.  Reinforcing the native otter Lutra 
lutra population in East Anglia: an analysis of the behaviour and range development of the first release group. 
Mammal Review, 16: 65-79. 
JEFFERIES, D.J., WAYRE, P. & SHUTER, R. 2001. A brief history of the Otter Trust’s successful programme of 
repopulating lowland England with otters bred in captivity with a special emphasis on East Anglia. Journal of the 
Otter Trust, 3 (4) 2000: 105-117. 
JESSOP, R.M. 1985. Status and conservation of the otter in Norfolk and Suffolk. Norfolk Bird and Mammal 
Report, 1984, 27: 144-149.   
JESSOP, R.M. & CHEYNE, D.L. 1993. The re-introduction of the European otter Lutra lutra into lowland 
England carried out by the Otter Trust 1983-1992: A progress report. In: Proceedings of the National Otter 
Conference, Cambridge, September, 1992. (Edited by Morris, P.) Pp 12-16. The Mammal Society, Bristol. 
JESSOP, R.M. & MACGUIRE, F. 1990. Norfolk Otter Survey 1988/89. Implications for the status of the otter. 
Journal of the Otter Trust, 2 (3) 1989: 9-12. 
KRANZ, A. 1999. Re-introduction of otters: A reply. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 16: 8-10. 
LACY, R.C., PETRIC, A. & WARNEKE, M. 1993. Inbreeding and outbreeding in captive populations of wild 
animal species. In: The Natural History of Inbreeding and Outbreeding. (Edited by Thornhill, N.W.) Pp 352-
374. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
LENTON, E.J., CHANIN, P.R.F. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1980. Otter Survey of England 1977-79. Nature Conservancy 
Council, London. 
MACDONALD, D.W., PHILCOX, C.K. & GROGAN, A.  1999. Patterns of otter (Lutra lutra) road mortality in 
Britain. Journal of Applied Ecology, 36: 748-762. 
MACDONALD, S. & MASON, C.F. 1976. The status of the otter (Lutra lutra L.) in Norfolk. Biological 
Conservation, 9: 199-124. 


MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1997.  Otter Survey of Essex: First and Second Reports. World Wide Fund 
for Nature, London. 
MACGUIRE, F.A.S. 1989. Analysis of spraints of the second group of otters re-introduced by the Otter Trust. 
Journal of the Otter Trust, 2 (2) 1988: 8-10. 
MASON, C.F. 1991. Otter re-introductions: does theory match practice? In: Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited by Reuther, C. & Röchert, R.) Habitat, 6: 213-217. 
MASON, C.F. 1992. Do otter releases make sense? The experience in Great Britain. In: Otterschutz in 
Deutschland. (Edited by Reuther, C.), Habitat, 7: 157-161. 
MASON, C.F. 1995. Impact of pollution on the European otter. Cahiers d’Ethologie, 15: 307-320. 
MITCHELL-JONES, A.J., JEFFERIES, D.J., TWELVES, J., GREEN, J. & GREEN, R. 1984. A practical system of 
tracking otters Lutra lutra using radio-telemetry and 65 Zn. Lutra, 27: 71-84. 
MITCHELL-JONES, A.J., AMORI, G., BOGDANOWICZ, W., KRYSTUFEK, B., REIJNDERS, P.J.H., 
SPITZENBERGER, F., STUBBE, M., THISSEN, J.B.M., VOHRALIK, V. & ZIMA, J. 1999. Atlas of European 
Mammals. Academic Press, London. 
O’CONNOR, F.B., CHANIN, P.R.F., JEFFERIES, D.J., JENKINS, D., NEAL, E., RUDGE, J., SANDS, T.S., WEIR, V. 
& WOODS, M.S. 1979. Otters 1979: A Second Report of the Joint Otter Group. Society for the Promotion of 
Nature Conservation, Nettleham, Lincoln. 
PAL, G. 2004. Otterbook. Foundation for Otters, Budapest, Hungary. 
REUTHER, C. 1998. Re-introduction of otters - support or risk for otter conservation? IUCN Otter Specialist 
Group Bulletin, 15: 71-79. 
REUTHER, C., DOLCH, D., GREEN, R., JAHRL, J., JEFFERIES, D., KREKEMEYER, A., KUCEROVA, M., 
MADSEN, A.B., ROMANOWSKI, J., ROCHE, K., RUIZ-OLMO, J., TEUBNER, J. & TRINDADE, A. 2000. Surveying 
and monitoring distribution and population trends of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra). Habitat, 12: 1-148. 
RIDDING, M.O. & SMITH, H.D. 1988. Post-release monitoring of the second group of otters. Journal of the 
Otter Trust, 2 (1) 1987: 30-36. 
SHUTER, R. 1996. Road deaths as an indicator of the otter’s revival. Journal of the Otter Trust, 2 (9) 1995: 22-
23. 
SJÖÅSEN T. 1996. Survivorship of captive-bred and wild-caught re-introduced European otters Lutra lutra to 
Sweden. Biological Conservation, 76: 161-165. 
STRACHAN, R. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1993. The Water Vole (Arvicola terrestris) in Britain 1989-1990: its 
Distribution and Changing Status. The Vincent Wildlife Trust, London. 
STRACHAN, R. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1996. Otter Survey of England 1991-1994. The Vincent Wildlife Trust, 
London. 
STRACHAN, R., BIRKS, J.D.S., CHANIN, P.R.F. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 1990. Otter Survey of England 1984-1986. 
Nature Conservancy Council, Peterborough. 
WAYRE, P. 1989. Operation Otter. Chatto & Windus, London. 
WAYRE, P. & WAYRE, J. 2000. The rescuing, rearing and rehabilitation of orphaned otters. Journal of the Otter 
Trust, 3 (3) 1999: 81-86. 
WEST, R.B. 1975. The Suffolk Otter Survey. Suffolk Natural History, 16 (6): 378-388. 
WILSON, G., HARRIS, S. & MCLAREN, G. 1997. Changes in the British Badger Population 1988 to 1997. 
Peoples Trust for Endangered Species, London. 
WOODROFFE, G.L. 1993. Mammals. In: Wildlife Reports (Edited by Cleave, A.). British Wildlife, 5: 109-110. 
WOODROFFE, G. 1996. Reinforcing the otter population in the Yorkshire Derwent - a preliminary report. 
Internal Report to the Department of Biology, University of York. 
YAXLEY, R. 1997. Report of the Norfolk Otter, Mink and Water Vole Survey. Norfolk Wildlife Trust, The 
Environment Agency, Essex & Suffolk Water, Norwich. 
 
 
 
