--- 
source: 2007 000n.pdf
--- 

RE-INTRODUCTION EXPERIENCE IN SWITZERLAND 
 
Jean-Marc WEBER 
 
KORA, Thunstrasse 31, 3074 Muri, Switzerland.  email: jmweber@bluewin.ch  
 
 
At the end of the 19th century, otters (Lutra lutra) were common in the Swiss waters: so 
common, in fact, that members of the Swiss parliament considered this species a threat to the 
fishing industry and consequently decided to reduce their numbers considerably.  Hunting was 
open, and bounties paid for every kill.  Unsurprisingly, otter numbers decreased very quickly.  
Facing a dramatic situation, full protection was given to the species in 1952. At that time, 
around 150 otters were thought still to be living in Switzerland.  However, despite their 
protected status, numbers kept decreasing and there were only ten to 15 individuals left in the 
late 1970s. 
  
The first attempt to re-introduce otters to Switzerland was carried out in 1975 on the 
Schwarzwasser-Sense catchment.  This area was chosen on the basis of a comparative study 
on the suitability of 16 waterways as otter habitats (MÜLLER, 1980).  Four pairs of wild-
caught otters from Bulgaria were released in May and December 1975.  These were regularly 
tracked until 1982, when footprints of young individuals were found (WEBER, WEBER AND 
MÜLLER, 1991).  As the re-introduction on the Schwarzwasser catchment was apparently a 
success, and otters from captivity were readily available, a Swiss Otter Group was founded in 
1984.  Its main objective was to re-establish a viable otter population in Switzerland through 
additional releases.   
 
 
Figure 1. Potential habitats for the otter in Switzerland, 1997. 
A: Lake Neuchâtel; B: River Aar 
50 km
A
B
Suitable otter habitat 
Sub-optimal otter habitat 


 
 
However, before any release, two main questions had to be addressed:  
 
i) what regions provide sufficient food resources for a minimal breeding population of otters? 
ii) what regions are attractive to otters, but could also be potentially dangerous for them? 
 
At first glance, two regions appeared suitable, western Switzerland and canton Tessin.  Nearly 
1,400 kilometres of river bank and lake shore were evaluated in these areas. Factors such as 
fish biomass, plant cover, human disturbance and potential risks were investigated.  In total, 
315 kilometres of banks were considered suitable for otters and 512 kilometres sub-optimal, 
fish biomass being the critical factor (WEBER, WEIDKUHN AND HOHL, 1988).  A year later, in 
1989, potential habitats were searched for otter signs, and only one site (1 site = 1 km) out of 
1,350 was positive (0.07%).  This was located on the south east shore of Lake Neuchâtel 
(Figure 1: WEBER AND WEBER 1991).   
Moreover and interestingly, no sign was found on the Schwarzwasser catchment 
suggesting a failure of the re-introduction attempt carried out in 1975.  In this regard, factors 
affecting otter populations are well documented.  Thus, in the 1980s, one hypothesis related 
Polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) contamination and otter decline in European countries.  
Could organochlorine pesticides have played a major role in otter disappearance from the 
Swiss waters?   
To address this question, PCB concentrations were measured in 76 fish [mainly trout 
(Salmo spp.), burbot (Lota lota) and perch (Perca perca)] collected in the main rivers and 
lakes of the country.  Concentrations higher than 0.5 mg/kg fresh weight were considered 
problematic and potentially dangerous for otters.  PCB levels in fish were much higher than 
this limit – 16.8 times higher in one instance - in all but two prospected water bodies (WEBER, 
1990).  Under these circumstances, the Swiss Otter Group dropped the idea of re-introducing 
otters in Switzerland and finally dissolved.  
  
In 1997, as part of a national programme to restore riverine habitats in Switzerland, 
WWF was interested in obtaining an updated evaluation of potential otter habitats, including 
waterways, in central and eastern Switzerland.  The same criteria as used in 1988 were 
examined (i.e. fish biomass, cover and disturbance).  According to this study, the distribution 
of potential otter habitats had not changed much over the decade, most of them occurring in 
western Switzerland (Figure 1: WEBER, 1997).  At that time, and despite the lack of a 
permanent and rigorous monitoring, PCBs were still supposed to be present in high 
concentrations in fish tissues. In addition, as revealed later in a study on fish populations 
(BURKHARDT-HOLM, PETER AND SEGNER  2002), fish numbers started to decline dramatically 
all over the country during the late 1990s.  Decreases in fish numbers higher than 30% were 
recorded in most main Swiss rivers from 1997 to 2001.  Reproductive failure in fish due to 
endocrine disruption and/or to changes in water temperature (1.5 to 2oC over the past 20 
years), amongst other factors, could explain this sudden decline (BURKHARDT-HOLM, PETER 
AND SEGNER, 2002).  The conclusion was that, in this context, any otter re-introduction 
attempt may be considered very hazardous, and hence should be postponed until 
environmental and trophic conditions have significantly improved.  All partners involved in 
otter conservation fully agreed with this decision. 
However, recently, the unexpected happened.  In spring 2004, an otter was observed 
on two occasions by three naturalists in a Nature Reserve located on the south east shore of 
Lake Neuchâtel.  Another observation was recorded by a fisherman in the River Aar in 
October 2004 (Figure 1: Weber 2004).  These observations were not confirmed until spring 


2005, when spraints were found in the region (D. WEBER, personal communication).  This 
finding raises the question of the animal’s origin.  Four hypotheses may be put forward:  
 
First, this or these otter(s) is (are) remnant individual(s) of the former population 
established in the Lake Neuchâtel area and of which the tracks were observed for the last time 
in 1989.  This scenario seems very unlikely, because otters and/or their signs would certainly 
have been found in the intervening period (i.e. a 15 year-period) by attentive birders and 
naturalists visiting the Nature Reserve.   
Another explanation is a spontaneous return of the species to Switzerland.  From 1998 
to 2001, six otters have been re-introduced in the neighbouring Alsace (France).  Should this 
small population breed regularly and expand, a spontaneous return to north western 
Switzerland is not excluded.  On the other hand, it is less probable that otters would disperse 
directly from Alsace to the Swiss Plateau, and by chance colonise the best remaining otter 
habitat in Switzerland.  Numerous potentially dangerous obstacles are distributed all along the 
possible colonisation ways.   
Thirdly, otter(s) could have escaped from captivity.  However, no such escapee has 
been recorded in the regional zoos.   
Lastly, these observations could result from an unofficial otter re-introduction.  
Circumstantial evidence and persistent rumours suggest that one or two otters could have been 
released in this Nature Reserve a few months before the first observation was made.  Besides 
being illegal, according to the Swiss federal law for hunting and protection of mammals and 
birds, this release makes no sense considering the precariousness of environmental conditions 
for otters.  It must therefore be vigorously condemned. 
Presently, Switzerland is far from being an otter heaven.  However, the situation may 
greatly improve if major efforts are concentrated on fish and pesticides monitoring, habitat 
restoration including creation of corridors, public information, and prosecution of illegal otter 
releases.   Should these conditions be fulfilled, otters may eventually find a suitable place to 
recover.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
BURKHARDT-HOLM, P., PETER, A. & SEGNER, H. 2002. Decline in fish catch in Switzerland. Project Fishnet: a 
balance between analysis and synthesis. Aquatic Sciences, 64: 36-54. 
MÜLLER, H. U. 1980. Die Wiedereinbürgerung des Fischotters am Beispiel Schweiz. In: Der Fischotter in 
Europa, Verbreitung, Bedrohung, Erhaltung (Edited by Reuther, C. & Festetics, A.) Pp 267-271. Selbstverlag, 
Oderhaus und Göttingen..  
WEBER, D. 1990. The end of the otter in Switzerland. Cahier de l’Environnement 128, OFEFP, Berne [in French 
or German with English summary]. 
WEBER, D., WEBER, J.-M. & MÜLLER, H.-U. 1991. Fischotter (Lutra lutra L.) im Schwarzwasser-Sense-
Gebiet: Dokumentation eines gescheiterten Wiedereinbürgerungsversuchs. Mitt. Natf. Ges. Bern, 48: 141-152. 
WEBER, D., WEIDKUHN, C. & HOHL, C. 1988. Habitats Potentiels de la Loutre (Lutra lutra L.) en Suisse 
Occidentale et au Tessin. Unpublished report, Hintermann & Weber, Reinach [in French or German]. 
WEBER, J.-M. 1997. Potential Habitats for the Otter in Switzerland: a New Assessment. Unpublished report, 
WWF-Switzerland, Geneva [in French with English summary]. 
WEBER, J.-M. 2004. Vers un Retour Naturel de la Loutre en Suisse ? Unpublished report, WWF-Switzerland, 
Zurich [in French]. 
WEBER, J.-M. & WEBER, D. 1991. The otter (Lutra lutra L.) in western Switzerland, 1989. In: Proceedings of 
the Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited by Reuther, C. & Röchert, R.).  Habitat, 
6:  53-55. 
 
