--- 
source: 2007 000n-42.pdf
--- 

 
THE DISTRIBUTION AND POPULATION TRENDS OF OTTERS (LUTRA LUTRA) IN 
FINLAND 
 
Risto  T. SULKAVA1 &  Ulla-Maija LIUKKO 2 
1.  University of Joensuu, Aaponkaari 3, 42800 Haapamäki, Finland  
email: risto.sulkava@pp.inet.fi 
2.  Finnish Environment Institute, P.O.Box 140, 00251 Helsinki, Finland  
email: ulla-maija.liukko@ymparisto.fi 
 
Keywords: Lutra lutra, Eurasian otter, distribution, monitoring, Finland  
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) populations declined throughout many parts of their range between 
the 1950s and 1980s (FOSTER-TURLEY, MACDONALD AND MASON, 1990; MACDONALD AND 
MASON, 1994).  In the 1990s and 2000s numbers have been increasing at least in some European 
countries (CONROY AND CHANIN, 2002; REUTHER, 2002; SULKAVA, SULKAVA AND SULKAVA, 
2003).  
 
A pilot study for otter monitoring was carried out in Finland using snow tracking between 
1995 and 1998 (SULKAVA AND LIUKKO, 1999, 2003).  Distribution of otters was studied at the 
same time, by collecting all otter observations from different sources.  
 
 
2   MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Northern winters offer the possibility to use field methods based on snow tracking, a technique 
with a long tradition in Finland, to monitor numbers and distribution of mammals (SULKAVA, 
2003; LINDEN ET AL., 1996; HELLE ET AL., 1998; SULKAVA, SULKAVA AND SULKAVA, 2003). The 
pilot study of Finnish otter monitoring was co-ordinated by the Finnish Environment Institute.  
Fieldwork was carried out by staff from the regional environment centres and the regional offices 
of Metsähallitus (the national forest and park service), together with otter experts and specially 
trained volunteers.  
 
Monitoring was carried out in 16 study areas around Finland (Figure 1), comprising  a total 
of 37,000 km2 of Finnish riverside and lakeland habitat (ca.10% of the area of the whole country). 
 About 100 permanent survey sites were established in each of the study areas, where stretches of 
watercourses between 20 and 600 metres in length were searched for otter tracks, depending on 
ice cover and other local physical characteristics of the watercourse.  Open streams, for instance, 
were surveyed over longer distances than ice-covered inlets.  The fieldwork was carried out no 
later than three days after a snowfall, thus making it possible to estimate the age of the tracks.  At 
each site, the ages, sizes and direction of the otter tracks were recorded.  The physical structure of 
the watercourse, i.e. the system of lakes, streams and rivers, provided a background for the 
estimation of the number of otters.  
 
 


 
Figure 1: The monitoring network in Finland includes 16 study areas. An index of otter abundance is calculated 
for each study area (mean value over three years) (SULKAVA AND  LIUKKO, 2003). 
 
 
When estimates were made for the total number of otters in Finland, population abundances 
outside the study areas were estimated with the help of data from the Finnish wildlife triangle 
scheme (LINDEN ET AL., 1996; HELLE ET AL., 1998), which describes the relative abundance of 
otters throughout the country.  Using this information, the otter abundances determined in the 
pilot study could also be assumed to be representative for much larger areas around each study 
area which are known to have similar otter abundances.  
 
Because of the short monitoring period, it was not possible to detect any significant ongoing 
changes in the size and distribution of the otter population.  Since 1985, however, the trend has 
been studied locally with a long-term study in one area (Area 7: Figure 1) in Central Finland 
(SULKAVA, 2003; SULKAVA, SULKAVA AND SULKAVA, 2003).  The results of the Finnish wildlife 
triangle scheme show the trend of otters in Finland (KAUHALA, 1996).   
 
 Distribution data were collected from different Finnish surveys between 1987 and 1998.  
The two largest were the Finnish wildlife triangle scheme (HELLE AND WIKMAN, 1999) and the 
Finnish pilot project for otter monitoring (LIUKKO, 1999).  The other sources were otter 
distribution studies in costal rivers of Finland, undertaken by the Finnish Society for Nature and 
the Environment (CRONSTRÖM AND LIUKKO, 1999) and the material of some otter experts. 
 
3   RESULTS   
 
Otter tracks were found in every study area each winter (Figure 1).  Fresh tracks were found in 
169 sites during the first year, in 1995-96 (with positive results obtained at 11.5% of all sites), 


141 sites in the second year (8.9%) and 120 sites in the third year (1997-98) (9.9%).  The 
differences between the numbers of positive site results in different years were not statistically 
significant (ANOVA, P>0.05).  Otters are evidently most abundant in the central part of the 
country.  
 
The estimated minimum numbers of otters in the study areas was 121 in the first winter (8.3 
individuals /100 site), 112 in the second winter (7.0) and 101 in the third winter (8.3) (Figure 2). 
The estimated size of the Finnish otter population was between 1,900 and –2,400 individuals 
during the period 1995-1998.  
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
1995-1996
1996-1997
1997-1998
Year
Individuals
All tracks
Fresh tracks
 
 
Figure 2: The minimum number of otters estimated in the study areas (mean values over three years) (SULKAVA 
AND LIUKKO, 2003). 
 
The number of otters in central Finland (area 7) increased between 1985 and 2003.  The 
population growth curve was sigmoidal, indicating that the population had most probably reached 
local carrying capacity in 1993, when the growth of the population stopped (Figure 3).  Many 
local observations, and also the results from the Finnish wildlife triangle scheme (KAUHALA, 
1996), support the assumption that the Finnish otter population has increased over large areas of 
the country in last two decades.  
 
1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001
0
25
50
75
Year
Number of individuals
 
 
Figure 3: Total otter population in the study area (1650 km2) in Central Finland, with the model of sigmoidal 
increasing of the population. Adapted sigmoidal regression, r2=0.82 (SULKAVA, SULKAVA AND SULKAVA,  2003). 
 
 


Today the distribution of otters covers the whole of Finland except the Åland Islands in south 
western Finland (Figure 4).    
 
 
 
Figure 4: Finnish otter observations in 50 km2 UTM grids. Data from all available sources in 1987-1999 (the 
Finnish Environment Institute, the Finnish Game and Fisheries Research Institute, Metsähallitus (national forest 
and park service), the Finnish Society for Nature and the Environment). 
 
4   CONCLUSIONS 
 
The results of our pilot study support the assumption that Finland hosts a viable otter population 
(1,900-2,400 individuals). The size of the population has been increasing, at least in central and 
southern part of Finland. The distribution of otters covers whole country, except the Åland 
Islands.  


5   REFERENCES 
CONROY, J.W.H. & CHANIN, P. 2002. The status of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra). In: Proceedings of the Seventh 
International Otter Colloquium Otter Conservation – An Example for a Sustainable Use of Wetlands, Trebon, March 
1998. (Edited by Dulfer, R., Conroy, J.W.H., Nel, A.J. & Gutleb, A.C. )  I.U.C.N. Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 
19A:  24-48.   
CRONSTRÖM, U. & LIUKKO U.-M. 1999. Rannikkojokien saukkokartoitus - Projekt Utter 1987-1994.. - In: 
Saukkokannan  tila ja seuranta Suomessa [The population size and monitoring of otters in Finland]  (Edited by 
Liukko, U-M.) Suomen Ympäristö, Luonto ja Luonnonvarat 353:97-106. Suomen ympäristökeskus, [Finnish 
Environment Institute].  [In Finnish with English summary.] 
FOSTER-TURLEY, P., MACDONALD, S. & MASON, C. (EDITORS) 1990. Otters; an Action Plan for their 
Conservation. IUCN/SSC Otter Specialist Group.  Kelvyn Press, Inc., Broadview. 
HELLE, P. & WIKMAN, M. 1999. Riistakolmioiden mahdollisuudet saukkokannan seurannassa. In: Saukkokannan 
tila ja seuranta Suomessa [The population size and monitoring of otters in Finland]  (Edited by Liukko, U-M.). 
Suomen Ympäristö, Luonto ja Luonnonvarat 353:77-96. Suomen ympäristökeskus, [Finnish Environment Institute].  
[In Finnish with English summary.] 
HELLE, P., WIKMAN, M., HELLE, E., BELKIN, V., BLJUDNIK, L. & DANILOV, P. 1998. Nisäkkäiden 
lumijälkilaskennat 1998 Suomessa ja Venäjän Karjalassa [Status of game animal populations in Karelia and Finland 
1998 according to winter track count data].  Riistantutkimuksen tiedote, 151:1-21 Riista- ja 
kalataloudentutkimuslaitos, Helsinki.  [In Finnish] 
KAUHALA, K. 1996. Distributional history of the American mink (Mustela vison) in Finland with special reference to 
the trends in otter (Lutra lutra) populations. Annales. Zoologica. Fennici, 33:283-291. 
LINDEN, H., HELLE, E., HELLE, P., & WIKMAN, M. 1996. Wildlife triangle scheme in Finland: methods and aims for 
monitoring wildlife populations. Finnish Game Research, 49: 4-11. 
LIUKKO, U-M. (EDITOR) 1999. Saukkokannan tila ja seuranta Suomessa. [The population size and monitoring of 
otters in Finland]  Suomen Ympäristö, Luonto ja Luonnonvarat, 353:1-128. Suomen ympäristökeskus [Finnish 
Environment Institute]. [in Finnish with English abstract] 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1994. Status and conservation needs of the otter (Lutra lutra) in the Western 
Palearctic. Nature and Environment, No 67. Council of Europe, Strasbourg. . 
REUTHER, C. 2002. The otter (Lutra lutra) in Europe - Resent developments and future needs. In: Proceedings of the 
Seventh International Otter Colloquium:  Otter Conservation – An Example for a Sustainable Use of Wetlands, 
Trebon, March 1998. (Edited by Dulfer, R., Conroy, J.W.H., Nel, A.J. & Gutleb, A.C. )  IUCN Otter Specialist 
Group Bulletin, 19A: 282-293.  
SULKAVA, R. 2003. Snow tracking - A good method for estimating otter (Lutra lutra) populations. (Unpublished). 
SULKAVA, R. & LIUKKO, U-M. 1999. Valtakunnallinen saukkokannan lumijälkiseuranta.  In: Saukkokannan tila ja 
seuranta Suomessa [The population size and monitoring of otters in Finland]  (Edited by Liukko, U-M.)  Suomen 
Ympäristö, Luonto ja Luonnonvarat, 353: 7-77. Suomen ympäristökeskus, [Finnish Environment Institute].  [in 
Finnish with English Summary and conclusions] 
SULKAVA, R & LIUKKO, U-M.  2003. Using the snow tracking method to monitor otter (Lutra lutra) populations in 
Finland - A pilot study. (Unpublished) 
SULKAVA, R.T., SULKAVA, P.O. & SULKAVA, P.E. 2003. The density of otter (Lutra lutra) population in Central 
Finland - Density dependent reproduction and carrying capacity of river systems. (Unpublished) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
