--- 
source: 2007 000n-32.pdf
--- 

A REVIEW OF THE CONTRIBUTION OF POLLUTION TO THE DECLINE OF LUTRA LUTRA 
 
Arno GUTLEB1 & Don JEFFERIES2 
 
1.  IVM, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1087, NL-1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
email: arno.gutleb@ivm.vu.nl 
2.  The Vincent Wildlife Trust, 3 & 4 Bronsil Courtyard, Eastnor, Ledbury, Herefordshire, HR8 1EP, England, UK 
 
 
Over the last decades otter (Lutra lutra) populations have declined markedly in Europe. In addition 
to physical threats, such as habitat destruction, traffic accidents and drowning in fish nets and fykes, 
mercury, dieldrin and polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbon- (PHAH), and more specifically 
polychlorinated biphenyl- (PCB) pollution is considered to be one of the major factors in this 
decline (Gutleb, 2000; Jefferies and Hanson, 2000). Mercury may form a problem in areas with 
local pollution or where acidification results in increased mobility of mercury present in soils. 
Dieldrin may have had a contribution in the 1960’s, mainly in the United Kingdom, as the use on 
the continent was much lower, but no tissue samples for comparative analysis are available 
anymore, so that the role of dieldrin cannot be sufficiently investigated retrospectively. For practical 
and ethical reasons, no toxicological experiments with PCBs have been conducted with the Eurasian 
otter itself. Because of the lack of necessary data, a field study was performed to derive a no 
observed effect level for otters in the otter itself, its food and sediment (Murk et al., 1998). In this 
paper, the comparison of hepatic retinoid levels were compared with information on the health 
status of the dead otters, which has been presented in more detail by Leonards et al. (1996). A 
strong negative correlation was observed between hepatic vitamin A levels and TEQ levels in 
environmentally-exposed Eurasian otters. The results indicated that otters are sensitive for AhR-
related toxic effects of PCBs, and that current environmental PCB levels are high enough to cause 
adverse effects. Otters exposed to more than 2 ng TEQ/g lipid had strongly reduced hepatic retinoid 
levels, which coincided with a higher incidence of infectious diseases. Whereas for PCBs 
decreasing levels have been reported (Roos et al., 2001) other classes of compounds with similar 
toxicological properties such as polybrominated diphenylethers are widely used with increasing 
production volumes resulting in exponential increasing concentrations in biota including humans. 
The significance of these compounds for wildlife cannot be estimated yet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
