--- 
source: 2007 000n-2.pdf
--- 

RIVER OTTERS IN PENNSYLVANIA, USA: LESSONS FOR PREDATOR RE-INTRODUCTION 
 
Thomas L. SERFASS1, Robert P. BROOKS2, Larry M. RYMON3, and Olin E. RHODES, Jr.4 
 
1Department of Biology, Frostburg State University, Frostburg, Maryland, 21532 USA  
 email:  tserfass@frostburg.edu 
2Department of Geography, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, 16802 USA 
3Department of Biology, East Stroudsburg State University, East Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, USA 18301 
4Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, 1159 Forestry Building, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 
Indiana, 47907 USA 
 
 
Abstract.  Conservationists should consider both ecological and sociological factors during development and 
implementation of a predator re-introduction programme.  Since 1982, the Pennsylvania River Otter Re-introduction 
Project (PRORP) has applied an integrated, adaptive management approach to re-introduce 153 river otters 
successfully to seven water systems in central and western Pennsylvania.  The project comprised five developmental 
and implemental stages: 1) site selection, 2) identification and selection of appropriate sources and numbers of 
animals, 3) veterinary care, captive management, and translocation, 4) public relations and education, and 5) post-
translocation monitoring and evaluation, which resulted in a successful, ecologically based, and publicly supported 
re-introduction project.  Application of re-introduction techniques developed and refined during the project provides 
useful insight for designing and implementing predator re-introduction programmes. 
 
Keywords: River otter, Lontra canadensis, predator, re-introduction. 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Many mammalian predators have suffered population declines throughout large portions of their 
historic range in North America (HORNADAY, 1913; MURIE, 1958; HILLMAN, 1968; CHAPMAN 
AND FELDHAMER, 1982; HERRERO, SCHROEDER 
AND SCOTT-BROWN, 1986).  When 
Europeansettlers first arrived, large predatory mammals such as wolves (Canis lupus) and 
mountain lions (Felis concolor) were established components of terrestrial ecosystems in eastern 
North America (ALLEN 1942; HAMILTON, 1943; MECH, 1970; GODIN, 1977).  Medium-sized 
mammalian predators such as fishers (Martes pennanti) and martens (Martes americana) 
occupied forested habitat throughout most of New England and southward along the Appalachian 
Mountains (RHOADS, 1903; GODIN, 1977).  Similarly, river otters (Lontra canadensis) were 
widespread across a variety of semi-aquatic habitats (NILSSON, 1980).  Unfortunately, by the early 
1900s, eastern populations of these species had suffered extirpation or serious range reductions 
because of persecution, unregulated harvest, and habitat loss.  Predator populations in western 
states followed a similar pattern of decline because of government sponsored predator control 
programmes and habitat alterations (CAIN ET AL., 1972).   
 
Large mammalian predators offer a unique set of management problems because they 
maintain low population densities, have low reproductive rates, occupy large home ranges, and 
often have specialised habitat and prey requirements (ERRINGTON, 1956; HORNOCKER, 1970; 
CRAIGHEAD, 1979).  Consequently, conserving these species may require special management 
initiatives ranging from complete legal protection to carefully regulated and monitored harvests, 
and protection of large, contiguous tracts of suitable habitats.  Negative attitudes from some 
segments of society may hinder effective management and protection of predators (KELLERT, 


 
 
 
1985), particularly when management programmes involve predator re-introductions.  For 
example, opposition among some interest groups (primarily ranchers) complicated efforts of the 
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service to implement wolf re-introduction in Yellowstone National Park 
(BATH AND BUCHANAN, 1989).  Similarly, because of public outcry following unfounded 
newspaper articles depicting fishers as dangerous to livestock and children, an otherwise 
successful project to re-introduce the species to West Virginia was halted by legislative mandate 
(PACK AND CROMER, 1981).  
 
 
River otter population
prior to 1982
Pine Creek 
(22 otters released 
1983-1984)
Kettle Creek 
(4 otters released 
1982)
Loyalsock Creek 
(13 otters released
1985-1986)
Tionesta Creek 
(28 otters released 
1990-1995)
Allegheny River 
(22 otters released 
1996-2001)
Youghiogheny River 
(28 otters released 
1992-2001)
Laurel Hill Creek 
(11 otters released 
2000-Present)
Raystown Branch
Juniata River
(25 otters released
(2002-Present)
 
Figure 1.  Location of the remnant river otter population persisting in north eastern Pennsylvania prior to initiation 
of the Pennsylvania River Otter Re-introduction Project in 1982 and location of re-introduction sites.   
     
Although ecological and sociopolitical circumstances differ among re-introduction projects, 
approaches that we applied during the Pennsylvania River Otter Re-introduction Project 
(PRORP) may provide useful insight to biologists involved in planning predator translocation 
programmes (SERFASS, RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986).  The re-introduction project was initiated 
to reverse otter population declines that resulted from unregulated trapping and degradation of 
riparian and aquatic habitats during the 1800s and early 1900s.  Prior to these human-induced 


 
 
 
perturbations, otters inhabited all major watersheds in the state (RHOADS, 1903).  By 1952, when 
the Pennsylvania Game Commission provided river otters complete legal protection, the 
population had become limited to the Pocono Mountains region in north eastern Pennsylvania 
(Figure 1) and otters are currently classified as a "species at risk" in Pennsylvania (KIRKLAND 
AND KRIM, 1990).  During work with the remnant otter population (SERFASS, 1984), we 
concluded that statewide improvements in water quality and wildlife management techniques 
provided renewed potential for restoring otters to portions of their former range.  The objective 
of the project was to diversify the distribution of otter populations in Pennsylvania and, thereby, 
reduce chance of complete extirpation in the event of loss of the north eastern population. 
 
PRORP was implemented in 1982, following a comprehensive review of the status, 
distribution, and ecological aspects of the remnant otter population in north eastern Pennsylvania 
(EVELAND, 1978; SERFASS, 1984; SERFASS, RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986).  Preliminary 
investigations included examination of otter food habits, fish hatchery depredations, riparian 
habitat use, field sign and marking habits, review of public attitudes and perceptions toward the 
otter, and development of capture, handling, and captive management techniques (SERFASS, 
1984; SERFASS, RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986; SERFASS, RYMON AND BROOKS, 1990).  
Preliminary investigations were designed to enhance our understanding of biological and 
ecological aspects of otters and to serve as a basis for implementing the re-introduction project.  
Although results from preliminary investigations formed the basis for designing and 
implementing PRORP, approaches were subject to frequent update and refinement based on 
synthesis of experience and research results collected during the re-introduction project. 
   
To date, PRORP has successfully translocated 153 otters among seven drainages in 
central and western Pennsylvania (SERFASS, RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986; SERFASS ET AL., 
1993) (Figure 1).  Evidence obtained by radio-tracking and surveys for spraints and other field 
signs demonstrated that otters survived and have succeeded in establishing self-sustained 
populations (SERFASS AND RYMON, 1985; SERFASS, BROOKS AND RYMON 1993).  During PRORP, 
we developed, refined, and applied five elements to the project that resulted in successful re-
introduction of otters and widespread public support for the programme: 
 
a. 
Re-introduction site selection;  
b. 
Identification and selection of appropriate sources and numbers of animals for 
translocation;  
c. 
Veterinary care, captive management, and translocation; 
d. 
Public relations and education 
e. 
Post-translocation monitoring and evaluation 
 
 
In this paper, we review our approach in developing, implementing, and evaluating the re-
introduction programme. 
 
 
2   SITE SELECTION 
 
Selection of re-introduction sites was based on experience obtained through work with the 
remnant otter population and literature review of otter habitat requirements.  Primary focus was 


 
 
 
directed to selecting sites with an adequate prey base, unpolluted water, undisturbed riparian 
habitats with physical features that would provide denning opportunities, and adjoining aquatic 
habitats suitable to support range expansion.   
 
We focused on public lands for re-introductions because the long-term integrity of these 
habitats would not be threatened by development.  Initially, managers of public lands 
administered by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) 
were surveyed to evaluate potential river otter stocking sites throughout Pennsylvania.  Surveys 
provided information regarding water quality, fishery composition, land use, and recreational use 
for portions of most major watersheds in Pennsylvania.  Sites considered as potential re-
introduction sites were further reviewed by:  
 
a. 
Interviews with Wildlife Conservation Officers (WCOs) of the Pennsylvania      
Game Commission and Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission;  
b. 
Review of Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission and DCNR water quality and       
fishery data; 
c. 
On-site evaluations. 
 
Because otters exist at the top of the aquatic food chain, they are likely to be vulnerable to the 
effects of the accumulation of pollutants introduced into aquatic ecosystems by human activities 
(HALBROOK ET AL, 1980).  Thus, selecting sites free from environmental contaminants, such as 
heavy metals, organochlorine pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) was considered 
critical to long-term success of the programme.  As a supplement to water quality information 
collected from state agencies, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service co-operated in a study to 
examine tissue of fish collected at potential re-introduction sites for mercury and PCB 
contamination (RICE AND KULP, 1992).  The Clarion River in north western Pennsylvania was 
subsequently rejected as a re-introduction site because high PCB concentrations (3.0 ppm) were 
detected in fish.  Occurrence of populations of mink (Mustela vison) and piscivorous birds were 
evaluated during preliminary surveys of proposed re-introduction sites and their presence was 
judged as a positive indicator of water quality as well as a sufficient forage base.  Food studies of 
the north eastern population (SERFASS, RYMON AND BROOKS, 1990) and those from other states 
(LAGLER AND OSTENSON, 1942; RYDER. 1955; GREER, 1956; HAMILTON, 1961; KNUDSEN AND 
HALE, 1968) indicated that forage fish (i.e., Catostomidae and Cyprinidae), panfish (i.e., 
Centrarchidae and Percidae) and crayfish are important components of otter diets.  Consequently, 
drainages with this forage composition were favoured as re-introduction sites.  
 
Otters usually select rest sites and dens along undisturbed riparian habitats in structures 
such as tree root systems associated with undercut banks, rock formations, log jams, and 
abandoned beaver lodges (MELQUIST AND HORNOCKER, 1983).  To provide suitable denning 
opportunities, drainages selected as otter re-introduction sites, supported undeveloped stretches 
of forested riparian borders with the above riparian components.  
 
Cost prohibited re-introducing otters to all habitats considered suitable in the state.  
Consequently, selecting sites that provided a continuum of high quality aquatic habitats 
(adjoining and surrounding drainages) to serve as dispersal corridors following establishment of 
re-introduced populations was considered important to promote range expansion and re-


 
 
 
population of otters into other suitable habitats.  For example, release of individuals along Kettle, 
Pine, and Loyalsock Creeks in north central Pennsylvania provides opportunities for expansion 
throughout the Susuquehanna River drainage (Figure 1).   
 
 
3   SOURCES AND NUMBER OF OTTERS FOR RELEASE 
 
Ideally, re-introduction projects should attempt to obtain most founding individuals from the 
nearest viable populations (MEFFE, 1987).  Founders from local populations have evolved under 
selective pressures induced by the range of environmental conditions in the region and, as such, 
should be best suited to adapt to conditions imposed at release sites.   
 
Most otters used by PRORP were obtained by live-trapping in north eastern Pennsylvania 
and Maryland (Maryland Department of Natural Resources, MDNR) or purchased from trappers 
or commercial suppliers in Louisiana, Michigan, New York, and New Hampshire (SERFASS ET 
AL. 1993).  Originally, plans were to obtain otters exclusively by live-trapping in north eastern 
Pennsylvania and from the supplier in New York.  However, adequate numbers to sustain a re-
introduction effort during initial phases of the project could not be obtained from these sources.  
As a result, during 1983 and 1984, 17 otters were obtained from Louisiana and released along 
Pine Creek as a supplement to primary sources.  Although radio-tracking studies (SERFASS AND  
RYMON 1985) and subsequent streamside surveys indicated that Louisiana otters survived and 
established self-sustaining populations (SERFASS, RYMON AND RYMON, 1993), the translocation 
of otters from geographically distinct regions without prior knowledge of genetic variation 
among populations prompted criticism from members of the scientific community in 
Pennsylvania (P. DALBY personal communication; GENOWAYS, 1986).   
 
To address criticisms, we conducted an electrophoretic survey of tissue from 814 otters 
collected in 19 states and four Canadian provinces (SERFASS, 1994).  Although genetic identity 
measures indicated little regional differentiation among otter populations (SERFASS, 1994), an 
allele unique to the Mississippi River was detected during the study.  This evidence and review 
of genetic considerations for re-introduction (MEFFE, 1987; LEBERG, 1990) during the study 
prompted a revision of strategies for obtaining otters for re-introduction.  Although gene flow 
undoubtedly occurred historically among extirpated otter populations in western Pennsylvania 
and populations elsewhere in the Mississippi drainage, the revised strategy placed emphasis on 
use of individuals from north eastern Pennsylvania and surrounding states (New York and 
Maryland) as primary sources for stocking.  If adequate numbers are not available from primary 
sources, we attempted to obtain animals from the nearest regional source of otters occupying a 
similar latitude and range of environmental conditions as Pennsylvania such as New England or 
the upper Mississippi drainage (Great Lakes states).  Since releasing otters from Louisiana, 
PRORP has translocated an additional 127.  Among these, 124 were obtained from primary 
sources and the remaining three came from other northern populations (Michigan and New 
Hampshire) (SERFASS ET AL., 1993).  
 
 


 
 
 
3.1 Number of otters 
Re-introduction programmes need to incorporate minimum viable population (MVP) 
considerations when contemplating the number of animals needed to be released, establish and 
maintain a population.  MVP considerations include loss of genetic diversity, demographic 
stochasticity and environmental stochasticity (GILPIN AND SOULE, 1986). 
 
Release of 20-30 otters per re-introduction site has been sufficient to insure interaction 
among individuals and establish breeding populations (SERFASS, RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986; 
SERFASS, BROOKS AND RYMON, 1993). LEBERG (1990) applied population genetic principles 
developed by WRIGHT (1969) to demonstrate that loss of heterozygosity in founding populations 
is small if the population consists of ten or more individuals of equal sex ratios.  Consequently, 
the number of otters released by PRORP should be sufficient to maintain genetic diversity 
(SERFASS, 1994; SERFASS ET AL., 1998).  Release of otters from various discrete populations 
(mostly from the same ecoregion) minimised potential for inbreeding by reducing the likelihood 
of releasing a large number of related individuals.      
 
 
Release strategies were designed to offset consequences of genetic and demographic 
stochasticity.  For example, in north central Pennsylvania, concomitant releases were made along 
Kettle, Pine, and Loyalsock Creeks to provide the potential for genetic and numeric exchange 
between sub-populations.  A shared waterway (west branch of the Susquehanna River) provided 
opportunities for exchange of individuals among the re-introduced populations.  Additional 
opportunities for interaction among the populations through overland dispersal was facilitated by 
contiguously forested public lands connecting the release drainages.  Drainage patterns and 
quality of aquatic habitats were not ideal for the establishment of sub-populations along 
tributaries of the Youghiogheny River.  However, a co-operative agreement between the 
Maryland Department of Resources and PRORP resulted in the release of otters along suitable 
sections of the Youghiogheny River in both states.  This co-operative effort reduced expense of 
the respective programmes, substantially increased the number of animals released and 
established semi-isolated sub-populations within the drainage.    
 
As a final source of genetic and numeric enrichment to re-introduced populations, 
PRORP has recommended that the Pennsylvania Game Commission (PGC) establish a policy of 
translocating nuisance otters (e.g., hatchery depredations) from the north eastern population to re-
introduction sites.  
 
 
4   CAPTURE AND HANDLING 
 
Re-introduction projects are often limited by cost constraints as well as by the number of animals 
that can be obtained for translocation.  Thus, opportunities to acquire additional otters may 
disappear if initial re-introduction attempts fail.  Consequently, high survival rates among 
founding individuals are essential if a re-introduction programme is to succeed.  We believe the 
likelihood of survival during stressful, post-release acclimatisation periods is enhanced when 
translocated animals are in good physical condition.  To accomplish the release of healthy otters, 
we developed trapping and handling techniques that reduced frequency and severity of injuries 


 
 
 
and implemented a captive management programme designed to enhance the fitness of the otters 
(SERFASS ET AL., 1993).  Techniques used by PRORP for capturing and handling otters were 
developed during initial work with the north eastern population and refined during the re-
introduction project (SERFASS, RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986).  Development of live-trapping 
techniques that incorporated the use of padded leghold traps (softcatchR, Woodstream Corp., 
Lititz, Pennsylvania, 17543, USA) were effective in capturing otters and minimising trap-related 
injuries to teeth and paws (SERFASS ET AL., 1996).  Also, techniques were developed for 
restraining otters for removal from traps and transport to holding facilities (SERFASS, RYMON 
AND HASSINGER., 1986). The development of specially designed transport containers worked 
extremely well for confining otters and reducing stress during transport as well as serving as a 
den box while otters were in captivity (SERFASS ET AL., 1993). 
 
Otters handled by PRORP were usually held in captivity at least 10-14 days prior to 
release.  Captive management protocols were developed and refined with assistance from co-
operating veterinarians (SERFASS ET AL., 1993).  The primary objectives of the captive 
management programme were to treat pre-existing disease or trap-related injuries, provide a brief 
quarantine to serve as a precaution against spreading infectious disease to re-introduction sites 
and condition otters by facilitating weight gain on an ad lib feeding programme (SERFASS ET AL., 
1993).  Placing otters in captivity provided opportunities to schedule releases to coincide with 
favourable weather conditions, periods of low human recreational activity at release sites and to 
schedule public relations events.  Implementation of the captive management programme 
resulted in the release of healthy, well-conditioned otters and high survival rates (SERFASS, 
RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986). 
 
Serious trap-related injuries were infrequent among otters captured by PRORP and 
MDNR (using trapping techniques similar to PRORP).  However, animals purchased from 
trappers and suppliers were usually caught in traditional leghold traps and frequently suffered 
severe trap-related injuries to teeth and paws (SERFASS ET AL., 1993; SERFASS ET AL., 1994; 
SERFASS ET AL., 1996).  Purchases from suppliers were preferred to direct acquisition from 
trappers because the former usually held otters in captivity and treated injuries prior to selling.  
Based on experiences during PRORP (SERFASS ET AL., 1993), we strongly recommend against 
direct purchases from trappers for use in re-introduction programmes unless proper trapping 
protocols are established in advance.  
 
 
5   PUBLIC RELATIONS 
 
Initial public information and education programmes administered at re-introduction areas were 
based on experiences and information gathered during preliminary investigations of the remnant 
otter population in north eastern Pennsylvania.  We were particularly concerned that local 
fishermen would consider otters harmful to gamefish populations and, consequently, designed 
public relation campaigns to address this critical issue.  Although the results of a questionnaire 
survey of 192 sportsmen in north eastern Pennsylvania indicated that most were reasonably well 
informed regarding otter food habits, 11% of survey respondents considered the animals a threat 


 
 
 
to gamefish, and a portion of this minority was very vocal in condemning otters (SERFASS, 
RYMON AND BROOKS, 1990).   
 
Previous studies in other states had addressed the concerns of fishermen about otter food 
habits and concluded that the species was not harmful to gamefish populations (LAGLER AND 
OSTENSON, 1942; RYDER, 1955; GREER, 1956; HAMILTON, 1961; KNUDSEN AND HALE, 1968).  
However, we decided that an evaluation of otter food habits in north eastern Pennsylvania would 
be most relevant for responding to any related public concern arising at otter re-introduction 
areas.  To assemble a database on food habits, 407 otter spraints were collected and analysed 
from three dissimilar aquatic habitats (SERFASS, RYMON AND BROOKS, 1990).  Although fish 
populations varied among habitats, otters preyed most frequently on the most numerous and 
slowest moving fishes at study sites such as Centrarchids (sunfish) and Catostomids (suckers), 
rather than the trout and other gamefish favoured by anglers.  This result became an important 
aspect of our public relations programme and was publicised throughout re-introduction areas.  
Fish
Crayfish
Amphibians
Mammals
River Otter Food Habits – NE Pennsylvania
Insects
Food Items
Food Items
Sunfish
Trout
Suckers
Minnows
Pickerel
Perch
 
Figure 2.  Examples of pie charts used to convey information regarding river otter food habits during slide shows 
presented to the general public.  Information depicted in the pie charts was constructed based on results of food 
studies conducted on the remnant river otter population in north eastern Pennsylvania prior to implementing the re-
introduction project (SERFASS ET AL. 1990). 


 
 
 
Information about the otter project was presented to the local public at proposed re-introduction 
sites through newspaper, television, and radio reports.  News releases were followed by a series 
of public slide presentations (based on our research and current literature) depicting the otter's 
natural history and role in aquatic ecosystems.  To dispel concerns among local fishermen that 
otters were detrimental to gamefish populations, the slide presentation emphasised results of our 
food studies indicating that otters prey infrequently on gamefish.  Graphics regarding otter food 
habits were clear, concise, and easily interpretable by the general public (Figure 2). 
 
The intent to re-introduce otters to a particular stream or river system was usually 
announced in local newspapers approximately six to 12 months prior to release.  Slide 
presentations were subsequently scheduled for local sportsmen and conservation groups.  Any 
group expressing concern regarding the project was immediately consulted and offered a public 
education programme.  Pubic relations programmes included a question and answer session to 
facilitate opportunities to address specific issues related to project.  The success of this 
educational approach was demonstrated at our Pine Creek re-introduction site where after 
announcements that otters were to be released into Pine Creek, newspaper headlines read: "Pine 
Creek Sportsmen Oppose Otter Stocking: Group Fears Trout May Be Endangered".  Following a 
series of public slide shows and associated discussions with various sportsmen's groups, 
headlines in the same newspaper read: "Sportsmen Back Otter Stocking Program".  About 300 
slide shows have been presented since the inception of the project. 
 
The potential for otter depredation at fish hatcheries was another public relations concern 
at re-introduction areas.  Because of this concern, a survey was conducted of 21 hatcheries in the 
extant otter range in Pennsylvania to gain insight into frequency and severity of depredations 
(SERFASS, RYMON AND BROOKS, 1990).  Depredations were reported to have occurred at ten 
(47.6%) hatcheries; in most cases, however, hatchery owners reported that otter depredations 
were sporadic and usually lasted only a few days.  Nevertheless, as a precaution against conflicts 
at hatcheries and the potential for associated adverse publicity, we visited all hatcheries located 
within re-introduction areas and met with hatchery managers to discuss the potential of 
depredations.  During these meetings, a protocol was established with hatchery managers 
wherein PRORP would provide live-trapping assistance or materials for screening hatcheries if 
otter depredations became a problem.  This approach established a cordial working relationship 
between PRORP and hatchery managers and fostered additional local support for the project.   
 
To maintain public support and involvement, otter releases were organised as media 
events involving local newspapers and television stations.  In addition, representatives of local 
sportsmen's clubs and conservation organisations were invited to participate in the releases.  
Residents were kept informed of the success of the re-introduced otters (based on radio-tracking 
studies) through frequent news releases and ongoing slide presentations.   
 
Food studies conducted at the Pine Creek re-introduction site were used to educate the 
public further about otter food habits, predator-prey relationships, and demonstrated that otters 
were successfully foraging at the release site (Figure 3). We also co-operated in the making of a 
video that documents the Pennsylvania River Otter Re-introduction Project (The Homecoming, 
Pennsylvania Wild Resource Conservation Fund, Box 8764, Harrisburg PA, 17105).  This has 
generated considerable public interest and provides another tool for educating the local public 
about the otter project. 


 
 
 
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Trout
Suckers
Crayfish
Month
Frequency 
Of
Occurrence
%
River Otter Food Habits – Pine Creek
b
a
 
Figure 3.  Seasonal variation in the occurrence of trout (Salmonidae), suckers (Catostomidae), and crayfish 
(Cambarus spp) in the diet of river otters at the Pine Creek re-introduction site based on analysis of 1,300 spraints, 
1986-1987.  These results were used during public slide presentations to portray the opportunistic nature of the 
otter’s predatory habits.  The spring increase in trout consumption occurred during periods of trout stocking by the 
Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission.  Predation on suckers and other fish was inversely related to seasonal 
differences in availability of crayfish.   
 
 
During 1990-1992 we interviewed 416 trout anglers at Kettle, Pine, and Tionesta Creek re-
introduction sites to evaluate attitudes regarding PRORP and the effectiveness of our public 
relations programme.  Results of the survey indicated that most fishermen were well informed 
about the otter's natural history and supportive of PRORP (Figure 4).  Overall, the Pennsylvania 
River Otter Re-introduction Project has received strong public support fostered by the public 
education campaign that accurately depicted the otter's role in aquatic ecosystems. 
 


 
 
 
“I’m Glad River Otters were Reintroduced 
along (name of creek).”
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Strongly
Agree
Agree
No Opinion Disagree
Stongly
Disagree
Kettle Creek
Pine Creek
Tionesta Creek
“If needed, I would Support trapping 
restrictions on other furbearers to ensure that 
river otters survive along (name of creek).”
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Strongly
Agree
Agree
No
Opinion
Disagree
Stongly
Disagree
Kettle Creek
Pine Creek
Tionesta Creek
“Overall, I believe river otters are beneficial 
to the streams, rivers,and lakes the inhabit.”
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Strongly
Agree
Agree
No Opinion Disagree
Stongly
Disagree
Kettle Creek
Pine Creek
Tionesta Creek
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Strongly
Agree
Agree
No Opinion Disagree
Stongly
Disagree
Kettle Creek
Pine Creek
Tionesta Creek
“I hope reintroduced river otters survive along
(name of creek) and expand their population
beyond release areas.”
 
Figure 4.  Examples of responses by trout anglers to likert-scale survey questions at Kettle Creek, Pine Creek, and 
Tionesta Creek re-introduction sites, 1990-1991.  Although responses to survey questions indicated anglers were 
very supportive of the river otter re-introduction project, results of chi-square contingency table analysis indicated 
that responses differed significantly among re-introduction sites (p < 0.001).  Interviews at Tionesta Creek were 
conducted during periods when river otters were being released, coinciding with intense public relation activities.  
In contrast, release of river otters had occurred on Kettle Creek and Pine Creek at least six years prior to surveys.  
We suspect coincidence of the public relations programme to surveys as well as refinements in approaches used to 
convey information to the public during the course of the project resulted in the disproportionately higher frequency 
of favourable responses at Tionesta Creek.               
 
 
6   EVALUATION AND MONITORING 
 
6.1 Initial monitoring 
To evaluate the initial success of the re-introduction projects, several otters at the first four re-
introduction sites were surgically implanted with radio transmitters (MELQUIST AND HORNOCKER, 
1983; SERFASS ET AL., 1993) and monitored for up to one year following release.  The primary 
goals of these radio-tracking studies were to determine if habitats at re-introduction sites were 


 
 
 
suitable to sustain a river otter population and if individuals would remain and interact at re-
introduction sites.  A review of the results from radio-tracking studies demonstrated a high 
survival rate among re-introduced otters and that most remained within the re-introduction 
drainages (SERFASS, RYMON AND HASSINGER, 1986; SERFASS, BROOKS AND RYMON, 1993). 
 
Although radio-tracking results indicated that habitats at re-introduction sites were 
suitable to sustain populations, evidence that re-introduced otters would reproduce and maintain 
populations was necessary before concluding the project was a success.  To accomplish this goal, 
surveys for otter signs [primarily latrines and single spraints; (MOWBRAY, PURSLEY AND 
CHAPMAN, 1979)] were made to determine if otters remained at Pine Creek re-introduction sites. 
During surveys in autumn 1990 and spring 1991, otter spraints were frequently encountered 
along Pine and Kettle Creeks, demonstrating that the animals had remained at these release areas 
for at least six to eight years, respectively.  Surveys were conducted during periods of peak 
marking based on an evaluation of otter marking habits at the Pine Creek re-introduction site 
during 1987 and 1988 (Figure 5).   
 
 
Figure 5.  Area within the Allegheny River drainage in western Pennsylvania where in 2002 we initiated the 
development of a landscape-level approach for monitoring river otter populations. 
 


 
 
 
 
Although legally protected in Pennsylvania, trappers sometimes accidentally catch otters during 
the seasons for legal furbearers.  However unfortunate, these occasional trapping occurrences 
provide another mechanism for evaluating re-introduced populations.  For example, by reviewing 
trapping incidents and examining the carcasses of otters killed by trappers along Kettle and Pine 
Creek, we were able to demonstrate that reproduction had occurred based on occurrence of 
juveniles among the trapped otters (SERFASS, BROOKS AND RYMON, 1993).  Collection of 
information of trapping incidences was facilitated through the public education campaign which 
not only informed the public that the project had been initiated but also encouraged trappers to 
report trapped and released otters.  Although incidental trappings do not appear to have had a 
severe impact on re-introduced populations, because of the death of three female otters at Pine 
Creek during the 1989-1990 trapping, the Pennsylvania Game Commission enacted special 
trapping restrictions to provide additional protection for the species.  To prevent animosity from 
developing among trappers, local trapping and sportsmen's organisations were consulted and kept 
informed during the design and implementation of these trapping restrictions.  
        
6.2 Long-term monitoring  
We are in the final phase of the re-introduction process and are focusing on the development and 
evaluation of long-term approaches for monitoring the re-introduced populations.  Surveys to 
detect otter signs (e.g., spraints and tracks) have been demonstrated to be effective in determining 
the presence of otters and will form the basis for the establishment and refinement of monitoring 
protocols.  As part of the process of refining surveys, we have been considering four specific 
questions regarding the use of spraints for monitoring otter populations:   
 
a. 
Are otter latrines associated with certain riparian habitat features? 
b. 
Does otter marking intensity vary among seasons? 
c. 
Can DNA be extracted from otter spraints and applied for determining the density of 
otters in various wetland habitats? 
d. 
Can cost effective landscape-level monitoring approaches be implemented to improve 
the representation and prediction regarding the current and future distribution of otter 
populations?  
 
6.2.1 Marking behaviour and monitoring.  Our initial efforts to enhance the efficiency of spraint 
surveys focused on determining if latrine sites had distinct habitat features that could be 
identified by remote sensing (i.e. primarily aerial photos and maps).  For this assessment, riparian 
habitat features were compared between latrine sites and randomly selected sites at otter re-
introduction sites.   Certain habitat features (e.g. evidence of beaver activity, vertical banks, large 
rock formations, and backwaters) were more frequently associated with latrine than random sites 
and were therefore useful in predicting the location of otter latrines (SWIMLEY ET AL., 1998; 
CARPENTER, 2001; MILLS, 2004).  We now use aerial photos and maps to locate and assess 
concentrations of habitat variables identified as being associated with latrines to select areas for 
surveys.  Identifying these features prior to surveys substantially enhances our efficiency in 
assessing the presence of otters.    


 
 
 
 
To enhance this process further, we were also interested in determining if the intensity of 
spraint marking differed among seasons.   Understanding annual patterns (or lack thereof) of 
marking by otters has various practical implications – primarily for determining if there are 
periods of the year when spraints are most likely to be encountered.  Consequently, over three 
years monthly surveys were conducted in a variety of wetland habitats to determine if otters 
spraint marked more frequently during certain periods (CARPENTER, 2001; MILLS, 2004).  These 
investigations demonstrated that otters marked much more frequently during the spring and 
autumn.  From this information, we now conduct surveys almost exclusively during these 
seasons of peak marking activity.     
 
Figure 6.  Each county in Pennsylvania (bordered by dark) lines is typically comprised of two to three Wildlife 
Conservation Officer (WCO) districts.  The expanded area of the map demonstrates the portioning of a county in 
south western Pennsylvania onto three WCO districts.  A WCO district was the initial focus of our landscape-level 
evaluation of river otter populations.  All WCOs were interviewed to evaluate the presence and distribution of otters 
within their respective districts.        
 
6.2.2  Landscape-level population monitoring. Unfortunately, no standardised methodologies 
have been developed for monitoring long-term trends in otter distributions in Pennsylvania or 


 
 
 
elsewhere in North America.  Consequently, we have been developing an approach that will 
employ a combination of GIS and genetic technologies for application in monitoring the 
distribution and abundance of otters.  Our investigations have focused on developing a 
landscape-level monitoring approach within the Allegheny River drainage, which comprises 
approximately the western third of Pennsylvania (Figure 6).     
 
Figure 7.  Traditionally, surveys of Wildlife Conservation Officers (WCOs) have been used to evaluate the 
distribution of a wildlife species in Pennsylvania.   Highlighting the presence or absence of a species on a map 
delineated by various WCO districts portrayed the responses to surveys.  Illustration (a) demonstrates this approach 
in depicting the distribution of river otters in western Pennsylvania.  However, this approach severely inflates the 
distribution of species with specialised habitat requirements, such as river otters.  To depict the distribution of river 
otters in a better way we created an electronic grid comprised of 1-km2 cells.  We subsequently surveyed each WCO 
for their assessment of the occurrence (present or absent) of river otters within each grid cell (WCOs responded 
only for the district under their jurisdiction).  Illustration (b) represents the distribution of river otters in western 
Pennsylvania based on the survey approach using grid cells.  Using grid cells better represents the manner in which 
river otters occupy the landscape, creates a systematic approach for monitoring expansion or contractions in 
distributions, and established sampling units for assessing landscape-level habitat variables useful for assessing 
habitat quality within a cell.     
 
 


 
 
 
Initially, we conducted interviews with Wildlife Conservation Officers of the Pennsylvania Game 
Commission (the agency responsible for the management of all avian and mammalian species in 
the Commonwealth) to determine the general distribution of otters in the drainage.  WCOs 
enforce wildlife laws in the state, are assigned to a specific district (usually 1-3 WCO districts for 
each county in the state; Figure 7) and are generally well informed about the occurrence of most 
large or unique mammalian species in their districts.  The opinions of WCOs have traditionally 
been used to monitor the occurrence of otters at their district and county levels (SERFASS ET AL., 
1999).  However, this coarse-level approach considerably over-estimates the actual distribution 
of a habitat specialist, such as the river otter.   Consequently, we modified a GIS-based grid 
system developed in Pennsylvania, as part of the nationwide GAP project (SCOTT ET AL., 1993), 
resulting in the creation of a statewide electronic grid comprising 1 km2 cells.  WCOs were 
subsequently interviewed and asked to evaluate the presence or absence of otters within each grid 
cell occurring in their respective districts.  This level of evaluation provides a more realistic 
assessment of the distribution of otters and provides a standardised approach for assessing 
expansion or contractions associated with otter populations over time.  Also, each grid cell 
represents a sample unit and, therefore, facilitates quantification of landscape-level habitat 
features associated with the presence or absence of otters.        
Methodologies typically used to estimate population densities of wildlife species are 
generally not easily applied to otters.  Extraction and analysis of DNA from scats has been used 
to identify individuals and estimate population densities in some species (KOHN AND WAYNE, 
1997; KOHN ET AL., 1999), offering potential for application in estimating population density.   
 
The marking habits of otters yield a readily available source of spraints, which are 
relatively easy to locate and collect during surveys.  Consequently, there is potential to identify 
individual otters from spraints and estimate population density.  However, an important 
prerequisite to the application of genetic technologies required our development of microsatellite 
markers appropriate for use with river otters (BEHELER ET AL., 2004).  Subsequent to development 
of the microsatellites, we demonstrated that DNA could consistently be extracted from otter 
spraints and that otters possessed sufficient levels of genetic variation to identify individuals.  
The utility of applying these genetic technologies is currently being assessed in the field.  An 
important corollary to this fieldwork involves the placement of remote video and 35mm cameras 
at latrines where spraints are being collected for the genetic study (Figure 8).  The intent of this 
investigation is to validate that the number of otters visiting a latrine are appropriately 
represented by the genetic analysis.  Ultimately, our goal is to integrate the use of the grid and 
genetic technologies for estimating the size of otter populations at the landscape level. 
 


 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Photograph of four river otters taken with a remotely controlled 35-mm camera at Tionesta Creek re-
introduction site, January 2004. 
 
      
7   DISCUSSION 
Re-introduction has frequently been applied as a management strategy for restoring extirpated 
wildlife populations (GRIFFITH ET AL., 1989; IUCN, 1998).  Several authors have reviewed 
aspects of re-introduction projects that pertain directly or indirectly to otters.  RALLS (1990) 
offers general guidelines that should be applied for re-introducing otters based on the IUCN 
(1987) position statement on translocation of living organisms.  Approaches used by PRORP 
fulfill most IUCN guidelines and resulted in successful restoration of otter populations.  Some 
important aspects of the Pennsylvania programme included:  
 
a. 
development and refinement of live-capturing and handling techniques; 
b. 
veterinary care during a period of captive management; 


 
 
 
c. 
application of conservation genetic principles for selecting sources of otters and 
maintaining genetic variability in re-introduced populations (MEFFE, 1987; LEBERG, 
1990); 
d. 
evaluating fates of re-introduced individuals; 
e. 
long-term monitoring to determine if self-sustaining populations became established 
at re-introduction sites (SERFASS, 1993a). 
 
A variety of strategies have been used among the 21 states that have re-introduced otters in the 
United States.   However, few of these projects followed protocols meeting IUCN criteria for re-
introduction projects and most have not implemented long-term monitoring programmes.  We 
believe the approach implemented by PRORP serves as a positive example for conducting re-
introduction projects, resulting in the achievement of the primary conservation goal of 
reestablishing otters in a manner that is ecologically, ethically, and politically justifiable.      
 
The public education effort implemented by PRROP has been successful in obtaining 
support for the project and in focusing attention on issues related to the conservation of aquatic 
ecosystems.  PRORP is among the most highly publicised wildlife projects ever implemented in 
the Commonwealth.  In many ways, the project has resulted in the otter becoming an important 
symbol for wildlife conservation in Pennsylvania.  For example, through the re-introduction 
project the otter is featured on the Pennsylvania Wild Resource Conservation Fund (WRCF) 
license plate (the sale of each license plate results in a $15 contribution to conservation in the 
state), was the subject of a WRCF public education video, and has been the focus of numerous 
public television specials, dozens of regional television news broadcasts, and about 300 
magazine and newspaper articles.  
 
Various criteria have been established for selecting sources of individuals for re-
introduction projects.  Ideally, re-introduced animals should be obtained from areas that represent 
the same subspecies that occurred at the re-introduction site (RALLS, 1990; IUCN 1998).   To 
enhance the likelihood of a successful re-introduction, MEFFE (1987) suggests that re-introduced 
animals be obtained from nearby populations that occupy a range of environmental conditions 
similar to those that will be encountered at re-introduction sites.     
 
Most otters re-introduced in the United States were obtained from large, viable 
populations that sustain annual harvest by fur trappers.  However, otters were often translocated 
over large geographic distances and released into habitats dissimilar to those encountered at 
source areas.  Pennsylvania used otters live-trapped from a small remnant population from within 
the state, but also included otters from various other sources, for example, Louisiana (SERFASS ET 
AL., 1993b).  Criticism for the release of these individuals resulted in PRORP re-evaluating 
sources of animals (GENOWAYS, 1986; SERFASS ET AL., 1998).  After conducting studies to 
delineate genetic variation among otter populations in North America (v 1998), PRORP focused 
efforts on obtaining otters from regional populations (primarily Maryland, New York, and 
Pennsylvania).  We believe the revised approach is ecologically defensible, serving to expand the 
distribution of regional genotypes most likely to have occupied re-introduction sites.           
 
Comprehensive veterinary care and evaluation of translocated animals is recommended to 
enhance post-release survival and minimise spread of disease (HOOVER ET AL., 1984; DODD AND 
SEIGEL, 1991; IUCN 1998).  The extent of veterinary care and evaluation varied considerably 


 
 
 
among otter re-introduction projects in the United States.  PRORP implemented extensive 
captive management programmes with veterinarian participation to facilitate pre-release 
conditions, serve as a quarantine to identify and treat diseases, allow treatment of capture-related 
injuries, clinical evaluation, and surgical implantation of transmitters (SERFASS ET AL., 1993).  
However, most projects released otters soon after they were obtained, with minimal veterinarian 
involvement.  Many of the projects that did not include a captive management programme 
obtained otters from the supplier in Louisiana.  These received at least superficial treatment of 
injuries but were habituated to captive conditions prior to being sold.  Undoubtedly, mortality 
associated with severe injuries, disease, or inability of otters to cope with captivity occurred 
during holding periods in Louisiana.  Consequently, individuals obtained from Louisiana had in 
essence survived a selection process and, therefore, were reasonably healthy and tolerant of 
captive conditions when obtained by re-introduction projects.  We believe opportunities to treat 
injuries, detect and treat disease, pre-release conditioning to enhance likelihood of survival and 
other benefits provide sufficient ethical and practical justification for implementing a captive 
management programme with otter re-introduction projects. 
     
Monitoring the initial fates of translocated wildlife and subsequent long-term studies to 
determine if self-sustaining populations become established should be an important aspect of re-
introduction projects (IUCN, 1998; SERFASS, 1994).  Most states conducting otter re-introduction 
projects included some levels of monitoring such as radio-telemetry studies to monitor initial 
post-release survival and movements, or subsequent surveys for otter sign.  These investigations 
clearly demonstrate that most re-introduction projects have succeeded in restoring otter 
populations.  Unfortunately, no systematic approach has been implemented for co-ordinating the 
long-term monitoring of the re-introduced populations.  The approach being refined in our 
project enhances efficiency of conducting surveys to detect otter spraint and establishes a 
systematic approach for both short and long-term monitoring of populations. 
 
 
8   CONCLUDING STATEMENTS 
 
Re-introduction can be an important conservation tool for re-establishing a species to portions of 
its former range.  Because re-introduction programmes require a substantial commitment of time 
and financial support, opportunities may not be available to repeat failed efforts.  Consequently, 
to enhance likelihood of success, management objectives and procedures should be defined prior 
to implementing re-introduction efforts.  To facilitate project development and implementation, 
biologists responsible for overseeing re-introduction projects should become familiar with the 
biological and behavioural aspects of the species being considered for re-introduction.  In 
addition to a literature review, we recommend that biologists achieve some level of "hands-on" 
work experience with the species intended for translocation before initiating a re-introduction 
project.  For example, insight gained while working with the remnant otter population in north 
eastern Pennsylvania was invaluable to us in selecting suitable re-introduction sites, and in 
minimising injury during capture, handling, and translocating individuals.   
 
In many cases, remnant populations may not exist for study within the political 
jurisdiction of biologists responsible for the re-introduction.  In these instances, we suggest 


 
 
 
seeking opportunities to interact with those elsewhere engaged in research projects with the 
species of interest.  Additional discussions and interactions with veterinarians, curators, and 
caretakers at zoos displaying the species can contribute insight into its handling and care 
requirements.  Biologists should carefully monitor success of the initial approaches used during 
translocations, and, when necessary, refine the process based on experience and results acquired 
during the project.  Successes and failures associated with translocation processes should be 
reported to prevent replication of errors by others engaged in similar projects. 
 
PRORP has benefited by an integrated approach that incorporated professional expertise 
from various disciplines including wildlife biology, veterinary science, and population genetics.  
Development of the project was based on a literature review, experiences learned from research 
with the state's remnant otter population, and discussion with other professionals working with 
otters.  We believe lessons learned during PRORP have useful applications for re-introduction 
projects involving otters or other meso-carnivores.    
 
 
9   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
Primary funding and support for the PRORP were provided by the Pennsylvania Game 
Commission (PGC), Pennsylvania Wild Resource Conservation Fund (WRCF; nongame tax-
checkoff), and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Allegheny National Forest (ANF).  We are 
grateful to A. Hayden (deceased) and J. Hassinger of the PGC, F. Felbaum of the WRCF, and B. 
Nelson of the ANF for their ongoing co-operation and support of river otter research in 
Pennsylvania.  R. Peper and M. Whary of the Laboratory Animal Resources Program at The 
Pennsylvania State University (PSU) were extremely generous with their time and expertise in 
providing veterinary care to otters.  
 
 
10   REFERENCES 
 
BATH, A. J. & BUCHANAN T. 1989. Attitudes of interest groups in Wyoming toward wolf restoration in Yellowstone 
National Park.  Wildlife Society Bulletin, 17: 519-525. 
BEHELER, A. S., FIKE, J. A., MURFITT, L. M., RHODES, JR., O. E. & SERFASS, T. L. 2004. Development of  
polymorphic microsatellite loci for North American river otters (Lontra canadensis) and amplification in related 
Mustelids.  Mol. Ecol. Notes, 4, 56-58 
CAIN, S. A., KADLEC, J. A., ALLEN, D. L., COOLEY, R. A., HORNOCKER, M. G., LEOPOLD, A. S., & WAGNER, F. 
H.  1972. Predator control-1971. Report to the Council of Environmental Quality and U.S.D.I. by the Advisory 
Committee on Predator Control.  Institute. for Environmental. Quality, University of. Michigan., Ann Arbor.  
CARPENTER, C. P. 2001. Scat Marking and use of Spraint Sites by River Otters along Tionesta Creek, north western 
Pennsylvania.  M. S. Thesis. Frostburg State University, Frostburg, Maryland, USA.   
CHAPMAN, J. A., & FELDHAMER, G. A. (EDITORS). 1982. Wild Mammals of North America.  Johns Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, and London, England.   
CRAIGHEAD, F. C., JR. 1979. Track of the Grizzly. Sierra Club Books, San Francisco, California. 
ERRINGTON, P. L. 1956. Factors limiting higher vertebrate populations. Science, 124: 304-307. 
EVELAND, T. 1978. The Status, Distribution, and Identification of Suitable Habitat of River Otters in Pennsylvania. 


 
 
 
M.S. Thesis, East Stroudsburg University, East Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania.  
GENOWAYS, H. H. 1986. Causes for large mammals to become threatened and endangered.  In: Endangered and 
Threatened Species Programs in Pennsylvania and other States: Issues and Management. (Edited by Majumdar, 
S.K., Brenner, F.J. and Rhoads, A. F.) Pp.234-251. Pennsylvania Academy of Science, Easton, Pennsylvania.  
GILPIN, M. E. & SOULE, M. E. 1986. Minimum viable populations: The processes of species extinctions.  In: 
Conservation Biology: The Science of Scarcity and Diversity. Edited by Soule, M.E.) Pp. 19-34. Sinauer Associates, 
Sunderland, Massachusetts. 
GODIN, A. J. 1977. Wild Mammals of New England. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, and 
London, England. 
GREER, K. R. 1956. "The otter's diet - good or bad?".  Montana Wildlife, 5: 14-17. 
HALBROOK, R. S., JENKINS, J. H., BUSH, P. B. & SEABOLT, N. D. 1981.  Selected environmental contaminants in 
river otters (Lutra canadensis) of Georgia and their relationship to the possible decline of otters in North America. 
Worldwide Furbearers Conference Proceedings, 3, 1752-62.  
GRIFFIN, B., SCOTT, J.M., CARPENTER, J.W. & REED, C. 1989. Translocation as a species conservation tool:  
status and strategy. Science, 245: 477-480. 
HAMILTON, W. J. 1943. The Mammals of Eastern United States.  Comstock Publishing Company, Ithaca, 
NewYork. 
HAMILTON, W. J., JR.   1961. Late autumn, winter, and early spring foods of 141 otters from New York.  New York 
Fish and Game Journal, 8: 106-109. 
HERRERO, S., SCHROEDER, C., & SCOTT-BROWN, M. 1986. Are Canadian foxes swift enough?  Biological 
Conservation, 36: 159-167. 
HILLMAN, C. N. 1968. Field observations of black-footed ferrets in South Dakota. Transactions of the North 
American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference, 33: 433-443. 
HORNADAY, W. T. 1913.  Our Vanishing Wildlife, its Extermination and Preservation. New York Zoological 
Society, New York.    
HOOVER, J. P., ROOT, C.R. & ZIMMER, M.A. 1984. Clinical evaluation of American river otters in a re-
introduction study. Journal of American Veterinary Medical Association, 185: 1321-1326. 
HORNOCKER, M. G. 1970. An analysis of mountain lion predation upon mule deer and elk in the Idaho Primitive 
Area.  Wildlife Monographs, No. 21.   
IUCN.1987. The IUCN Position Statement on Translocation of Living Organisms: Introductions, Re-introductions, 
and Re-stocking. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland. 
IUCN. 1998. Guidelines for Re-introductions. Gland, Switzerland, United Kingdom. 
KELLERT, S. R. 1985. Public perceptions of predators, particularly the wolf and coyote. Biological Conservation, 
31: 167-189. 
KIRKLAND, G. L., JR. & KRIM, P. M. 1990. Survey of the statuses of mammals of Pennsylvania. Journal of the 
Pennsylvania Academy of Science, 1: 33-45. 
KNUDSEN, G. J. & HALE, J. B. 1968. Food habits of otters in the Great Lakes region. Journal of Wildlife 
Management, 32: 89-93. 
KOHN, M. H & WAYNE, R. K. 1997. Facts from faeces revisited. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 12: 223-227. 
KOHN R. M. & WAYNE, R. K. 1999. Estimating population size by genotyping faeces. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of  London, 266: 657-663. 
LAGLER, K. F. & OSTENSON, B. T. 1942. Early spring food of the otter in Michigan. Journal of Wildlife 
Management, 6: 244-254. 
LEBERG, P. L. 1990. Genetic considerations in the design of introduction programs. Transactions of the North 
American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference, 55: 609-619. 
MECH, L. D. 1970. The Wolf - the Ecology and Behaviour of an Endangered Species.  University of Minnesota 
Press, Minneapolis, Minnesota. 
MEFFE, G. K. 1987. Conservation genetics and the management of endangered fishes. Fisheries, 11: 14-23. 
MELQUIST, W. E. & HORNOCKER, M. G.  1983. Ecology of river otters in west central Idaho. Wildlife Monograph, 


 
 
 
No. 83.  
MILLS, M. A. 2004. Scat-marking by River Otters in Pennsylvania and Maryland.  MS Thesis, Frostburg State 
University, Frostburg, Maryland, USA.  
MOWBRAY, E. E., PURSLEY, D. & CHAPMAN, J. A. 1979. The status, population characteristics, and harvest of the 
river otter in Maryland. Publications in Wildlife Ecology, No. 2, Maryland Wildlife Administration.   
MURIE, O. J. 1958. The last of the big bears. Audubon, 60: 156-159. 
NILSSON, G. 1980. River Otter Research Workshop.  Florida State Museum, Gainesville, Florida. 
PACK, J. C. & CROMER, J. I. 1981. Re-introduction of fisher in West Virginia.  Worldwide Furbearer Conference 
Proceedings, 2: 1431-442. 
RALLS, K. 1990.  Re-introductions. In: Otters: an Action Plan for their Conservation. (Edited by. Foster-Turley, P., 
Macdonald, S.M. &  Mason, C.F.) Pp 20-21, Kelvyn Press, Inc., Broadview, Illinois, USA. 
RHOADS, S. 1903. Mammals of Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Memoirs of the Museum of. Compararative Zoology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
RICE, C. L. & KULP, C. J. 1992. Concentrations of mercury and organochlorine compounds in river otter prey 
organisms in Pennsylvania. U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Pennsylvania Field Office, Special Project Report 93-3
RYDER, R. A. 1955. Fish predation by the otter in Michigan. Journal of Wildlife Management, 19: 497-498. 
SCOTT, J. M., DAVIS, F., CSUTI, B., NOSS, R. F., BUTTERFIELD, B., GROVES, C., ANDERSON, J., CAICCO, S.,  
D’ERCHIA, F., EDWARDS, T. C., ULLIMAN, J. & WRIGHT, R. G. 1993. Gap analysis: a geographic approach to 
protection of biological diversity. Wildlife Monograph, 123. 
SERFASS, T. L. 1984. Ecology and Feeding Relationships of River Otters in north eastern Pennsylvania. MS Thesis. 
East Stroudsburg University, East Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania. 
SERFASS, T. L. 1994. Conservation Genetics and Re-introduction Strategies for River Otters. PhD Thesis.  The 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA. 
SERFASS, T. L., BROOKS, R. P., NOVAK, J. M., JOHNS, P. E. & RHODES, JR., O. E. 1998. Genetic variation among 
populations of river otter in North America: considerations for re-introduction projects.  Journal of Mammalogy, 
79B: 736-746.  
SERFASS, T. L., BROOKS, R. P. & RYMON, L. M. 1993. Evidence of long-term survival and reproduction by 
translocated river otters.  The Canadian Field-Naturalist, 107: 59-63. 
SERFASS, T. L., BROOKS, R. P., SWIMLEY, T. J., RYMON, L. M. & HAYDEN, A. H. 1996. Considerations for 
capturing, handling, and translocating river otters. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 24: 25-31. 
SERFASS, T. L., LOVALLO, M.J., BROOKS, R.P, HAYDEN, A.H. & MITCHELTREE, D.H. 1999. Status and 
distribution of river otters in Pennsylvania following a re-introduction project. Pennsylvania Academy of Science, 
73: 10-14.  
SERFASS, T. L., PEPER, R. L, WHARY, M. T. & BROOKS, R. P. 1993. River otter re-introduction in Pennsylvania: 
pre-release care and clinical evaluation. Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine, 24: 28-40. 
SERFASS, T. L. & RYMON, L. M. 1985. Success of river otters re-introduced into Pine Creek drainage in north 
central Pennsylvania. Transactions of the north east Section of the Wildlife Society, 41: 138-49. 
SERFASS, T. L., RYMON, L. M., & BROOKS, R. P. 1990. Feeding relationships of river otters in north eastern 
Pennsylvania.  Transactions of the north east Section of the Wildlife Society, 47: 43-53. 
SERFASS, T. L., RYMON, L. M. & HASSINGER, J. D. 1986. Development and progress of Pennsylvania's river otter 
re-introduction program.  In:  Endangered and Threatened Species Programs in Pennsylvania and other States: 
Causes, Issues, and Management.  (Edited by Majumdar, S.K. Brenner, F.J. &Rhoads, A.F.) Pp. 322-342. 
Pennsylvania Academy of Science, Easton, Pennsylvania.     
SWIMLEY, T. J., SERFASS, T. L., BROOKS, R. P. & TZILKOWSKI, W. M. 1998. Predicting river otter latrine sites in 
Pennsylvania. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 26: 836-845. 
WRIGHT, S. 1969. Evolution and Genetics of Populations.  Vol. 2.  The Theory of Gene Frequencies.  University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois. 
 
 
 
 
