--- 
source: 2007 000n-12.pdf
--- 

 
1
ROAD ACCIDENTS: ARE THEY A SIGNIFICANT THREAT TO THE SURVIVAL OF THE 
OTTER? 
 
Adam GROGAN 
Wildlife Department, RSPCA HQ, Wilberforce Way, Southwater, Horsham, RH13 5ST, England, UK 
email: agrogan@rspca.org.uk  
 
Abstract:  The Eurasian otter has made a dramatic and welcome recovery to many of the river systems within the 
UK, following its decline in the mid-1950s caused by agricultural intensification.  This new expanding otter 
population is now seen to be under a threat from a new range of anthropogenic causes.  One such threat is the 
expansion of new roads and the upgrading of existing ones which creates hazards for unwary otters. In addition the 
otter population in England has now spread to the Midlands where many existing roads have no facilities to allow 
individuals to cross safely. 
However, as roads kill many tens of otters in this country each year, does this actually have a big enough 
impact to affect the otter population?  This is a difficult question to answer as data from the field, in the form of 
casualty reports and post mortems, do not provide enough information about populations as a whole. As the otter is 
a wide-ranging animal, the habitat fragmentation and destruction caused by road schemes may not have major 
consequences for the species as alternative habitats may be readily available (from the otters’ point of view). 
Pollution problems may also be avoided in the same way. The main affect will therefore be road casualties, but the 
data from post mortems, excellent for providing information on individuals, may be misleading in terms of 
population dynamics. 
This paper discusses the causes of road casualties and whether these will actually affect the population of 
otters in the UK. 
 
Keywords. Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, road casualties. 
1   INTRODUCTION 
The publication in May 2003 of the 4th Otter Survey of England (CRAWFORD, 2003) confirmed 
that the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) is recolonising much of its former range in England after the 
decline in population that started in the mid-1950s.  Despite this success there are fears that the 
reoccupation of former habitats may be compromised if other threats to otters cannot be curtailed 
or contained.  One such threat is road accidents; 208 have been reported killed in south west 
England (Cornwall, Devon, Dorset and Somerset) since the start of 2000.  This figure is 
astonishingly high considering HARRIS ET AL. (1995), estimated the pre-breeding populations of 
otters in England in the mid 1980s to be only 350.  How does such high mortality threaten the 
survival of the otter?  
 
 
2   PROBLEMS CREATED BY ROADS 
 
Otters are not the only animal killed on roads, nor is this a problem limited to the UK. There are 
numerous papers recording the incidence of road traffic accidents (RTAs) in many countries 
covering a variety of species (Table 1).  Nor are such collisions the only way that roads affect 
species. Disturbance, in the form of noise, pollution and associated run-off, and even light 


 
2
pollution can affect the behaviour of some species.  Habitat destruction and fragmentation 
degrade both terrestrial and aquatic habitats, which can lead to species decline and extinction. 
 
Table 1. A sample of papers from across the world discussing the problem of roads and mammals. 
 
Country 
Reference 
Species Killed 
Numbers of 
Casualties 
Duration 
Tanzania 
DREWS, 1995 
Yellow 
baboon 
African civet 
Spotted hyena 
 
15 
20 
17 
15 months 
Australia 
LINTERMANS & CUNNINGHAM , 
1999 
Easter grey 
kangaroo 
1068 
30 months 
USA 
ROMIN & BISSONETTE, 1996 
Deer 
500,000 
1991 
Belgium 
HOLSBEEK, RODTS  & 
MUYLDERMANS , 1999 
Hedgehog 
European hare 
Red squirrel 
1281 
313 
219 
24 months 
Holland 
HUIJSER, 2000 (citing Huijser & 
Bergers, 1998) 
Hedgehog 
113,000 - 
340,000 
Per annum 
Nebraska, 
USA 
CASE, 1978 
Raccoon 
Skunk 
Opossum 
Badger 
502 
205 
139 
79 
12 months 
1975 
USA 
INBAR & MAYER, 1999 
Armadillo 
143 
13 months 
 
Roads cut through the landscape, obliterating some habitats and dividing others.  Species that are 
wide ranging, such as the otter, may need to cross these roads to access all areas within their 
range.  This can expose the individuals of such species to traffic and therefore collisions.  The 
effect of a car colliding with an otter is usually fatal for the animal.  Furthermore there are 
welfare implications in these collisions; animals hit by cars could take a long time to die and 
dependent cubs are vulnerable if their mother is killed, unless located and taken into care.  
However the effects of road casualties on the population and whether there are associated 
ecological (rather than ethical) reasons for installing mitigation such as otter tunnels, are much 
harder to assess. 
   
Roads can also benefit some species as their construction can provide opportunities to 
create new habitats, as has been demonstrated by the flourishing of rare flora on some road 
verges.  Such habitats need to be managed carefully so that they do not create conflicts within 
them. 
 
 
3   PREVIOUS ANALYSES OF OTTER ROAD CASUALTIES 
 
The fact that the otter is a species of high conservation value, and that the National Otter 
Biodiversity Steering Group had identified roads as a major cause of concern, encouraged the 
Highways Agency to fund research into otter road casualties, completed in two stages: a desk 
study to analyse trends in otter road casualty records (PHILCOX, GROGAN AND MACDONALD, 
1999) and subsequent field work (GROGAN, PHILCOX AND MACDONALD, 2001).  Data were 
collected on 673 otter road casualties recorded between 1971 and 1996 from the whole of the UK 
(Figure 1). 


 
3
                 Figure 1. The location of casualty records and regions from PHILCOX ET AL, 1999. 
 
 
 
100 km
Scotland
Wales
England
Islands
N
RTA records
Regional borders
south 
west 


 
4
The analysis identified particular trends in these casualties based on season, distance from water, 
road type and crossing type (PHILCOX, GROGAN AND MACDONALD , 1999). In summary: 
 
• The sex ratio was biased to males at a ratio of 1.28:1; 
• There was a seasonal trend with 66.5% of otters killed between October and March; 
• Both rainfall and river flow were positively correlated with the number of RTAs, but stronger 
association to one or other of these variables was noted in different regions; 
• Otters killed on a watercourse were 1.36 times more likely to be killed at culverts than 
bridges;  
• Trunk roads accounted for 57.3% of casualties, despite only comprising 13.1% of the road 
network; 
• The number of RTAs was linked to population density. Higher density populations (as 
measured by site occupancy) incurred greater numbers of casualties; 
• A zone of 100 metres from freshwater or the coast accounted for 67% of casualties. 
 
The results of this work were guidelines produced as part of the Design Manual for Roads and 
Bridges (DMRB) (HIGHWAYS AGENCY, 1999), for planners and designers of roads, which 
recommends methods of mitigation that could be used.  Although these analyses did identify that 
road casualties were more frequent in areas with higher otter population density (based on 
percentage site occupancy), such data cannot demonstrate that road casualties have a detrimental 
effect on the otter population. 
The second stage of this project was also in two parts. First, surveys were conducted of 
casualty sites in south west England (181 sites covering 203 casualties).  Additional sites where 
no otter casualty had been recorded, were also surveyed to try and identify differences between 
the samples.  Only headroom, (the distance between the trashline [as created by flooding] and the 
underside of the bridge), and the presence of weirs or sluice gates, were statistically significant 
factors associated with the occurrence of a road casualty.  Second, infra-red video surveillance 
cameras were used to monitor known otter crossing sites, including locations where mitigation 
measures had been deployed.  These demonstrated that otters will use such measures but that the 
animals stayed in, or close to, the water, whenever possible. An analysis of behaviours shown on 
the video demonstrated this, with behaviour relating to water being significantly more frequent 
(with running being the exception). 
The results of this stage of the work were produced as a report for the Highways Agency 
(GROGAN, PHILCOX AND MACDONALD, 2001). 
 
 
4   NEW DATA 
 
Since the conclusion of the above study, the Environment Agency have continued to collect otter 
road casualty data for south west England and Wales (Figure 2) and otter carcasses have been 
sent for post mortem examination.  Numbers of casualties have increased (Figure 3) with the 
previous analysis (PHILCOX, GROGAN AND MACDONALD, 1999) including 324 records for this 
area, compared with 921 as of the end of March 2003.  
 
 
 


 
5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The location of casualty records for England and Wales to Spring 2003. South west region (Cornwall, 
Devon, Dorset and Somerset) are defined by the black line, but analysis includes most casualties from southern 
England. 
 
south west 
Wales 


 
6
Analysis of this substantially larger data set includes data from south west England and Wales 
from 1971 to March 2003 (Figures 2 and 3) showed:  
 
• The sex ratio was still biased to males although at a higher ratio of 1.51:1; 
• There was still a seasonal trend with 67% of otters killed between October and March; 
• Rainfall was still positively correlated with RTAs, for Wales and the south west, although this 
trend was demonstrated over years and months, it was not well defined for any particular 
year; 
• Class “A” roads still accounted for the highest number of casualties, with 61%; 
• Numbers of RTAs could be linked to population density, as increasing populations appeared 
to be producing higher numbers of casualties. However the data from 2001 show a reduction 
in road casualties from 2000 for both areas, but while the numbers of casualties in the south 
west increased to 78 in 2002, the number of casualties in Wales continued to decline. It 
should be noted that 2002 was one of the wettest years on record. 
 
Figure 3. Numbers of otter road casualties recorded in south west England and Wales, between 1974 and March 
2003 
 
These data, although useful for identifying mortality trends do not express the effect that RTAs 
may have on populations.  The effects of season, rainfall and road class on mortalities are 
probably independent of population dynamics and are more dependent on region.  
Higher rainfall and flash floods in south west England and Wales could cause higher 
fatalities in these areas as opposed to East Anglia, for instance, where such flood events are less 
frequent, due to climate, hydrology and topography.  If rainfall is a major factor, then animals in 
areas prone to heavy rain (and flash floods) are at risk.  Examining the data from 1996-2002, for 
which rainfall data are available, there appears to be a trend between the average rainfall per 
month and the average number of otters killed (Figure 4). 
0
20
40
60
80
100
71
77
80
83
85
87
89
91
93
95
97
99
01
03
Year
Number of otters killed
Wales
Southwest
End of first study
(PHILCOX ET AL, 1999) 


 
7
 
Figure 4. Comparison between average monthly rainfall and otter casualties from 1996 to 2002, for south west 
England and Wales. 
 
Road class is probably also dependent on region (Figure 5).  Otters living in an area with a higher 
density of class “A” roads are more likely to be killed on these roads. However this statistic needs 
to be calculated using the density of each class of road in each region to understand if one road 
type is more hazardous to an otter than another. 
 
Figure 5. Otter road casualties for different road classes for south west England and Wales. 
 
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
160.00
Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Months
Average rainfall for SW England and 
Wales in mm from 1996-2002
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
Average numbers of otters killed for 
SW England and Wales from 1996-
2002
avg comb
avg ott comb
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
M
A
B
U
Road class


 
8
Figure 6 shows the numbers of otters killed in south west England and the percentage positive 
sites for otters, based on the most recent English survey.  The conclusion drawn from this is that 
both are increasing and it could be inferred that RTAs do not appear to slow the population 
expansion, but could be a result of it.  In areas where populations are stable, such as the Scottish 
islands, there is no increase in casualties recorded, although there is a higher rate of casualties per 
unit area (PHILCOX, GROGAN AND MACDONALD, 1999).  If RTAs do affect populations, the 
effects could be subtler and the data are not available to detect these.  What is the age structure 
and sex ratio of the population?  What percentage of otters are killed by cars as opposed to 
disease, predation, fighting etc.?  We have age and sex ratios for the otters that are collected as 
road casualties, but it is a biased sample.  The lack of data relating to populations, such as 
capture-mark-recapture data, for otters makes detecting such changes extremely difficult.  Any 
method using field signs would be more problematic, unless DNA can be extracted from them 
(COXON ET AL, 1999); alternatively, existing studies could be used as a model (ANSORGE, 
SCHIPKE AND ZINKE, 1997; SIDOROVICH, 1991). 
 
 
Figure 6. Increase in road casualties in south west England compared with increasing percentage of positive sites 
from the English otter survey. 
 
5   EXTRAPOLATION OF POPULATION STRUCTURE 
 
We could try and determine the population structure of the otters in different areas by 
extrapolating from road casualties that occur in known populations, such as those released in re-
introduction or rehabilitation programmes.  The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals (RSPCA) release rehabilitated otters which have microchips for identification; so far 
none of these has been identified as road casualty victims (this is checked when the animal is 
examined).  However it tends to be individuals or pairs of animals that are released and so the 
sample size, particularly for a given area, is small. Seven out of 17 (41%) of the captive-bred 
otters released by the Otter Trust into the Thames in 1999 have been picked up as road casualties 
(CRAWFORD, 2003), but this could be a result of the density of released animals in a limited area 
and the much higher volume of traffic in south east England.  Another study of 36 re-introduced 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
86 87 88 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
Year
Numbers of otters killed
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
% site occupancy based on 
English surveys
count
% site occupation


 
9
otters in Sweden lost eight animals (22%) to traumatic deaths (two female and six male) 
(SJÖÅSEN, 1997).  If we extrapolate from the results of these two programmes, the 78 otters killed 
in south west England in 2002 could represent a population of between 200 and 350 in this area.  
Animals that have been used in such release programmes may not be a good indicator of 
behaviour in wild otters although previous studies have found that the behaviour is comparable 
(JEFFERIES ET AL, 1986). 
Another method of studying population dynamics is to interpret and extrapolate the data 
from carcasses of otters, either by road kill or other means.  There are numerous other studies 
from Europe that have examined otter mortalities (Table 2).   One looked specifically at road kills 
and how they could be mitigated (MADSEN, 1996).  Others have used the data to describe 
populations, with ANSORGE, SCHIPKE AND ZINKE, (1997), using the data to build a population 
model. 
 
Table 2. Comparison of sex ratios from different studies of otter deaths. 
 
Reference 
Sample size (*) 
% RTA 
Ratio M:F 
Additional comments 
HEGGEBERGET, 
1991 
>500 
410 by man 
45  
(185 of 410) 
1.4:1 
 
KRUUK & 
CONROY, 1991 
113 
42 
 
M:F not indicated 
Showed RTAs to have no bias 
in terms of age. 
KÖRBEL, 1994 
303 (230) 
100 
1.3:1 
 
MADSEN, 1996 
115 (88) 
100 
1.7:1 
 
ANSORGE ET 
AL., 1997 
225 
64 
1.2:1 
Model from data suggests ratio 
in wild population of 1:3.5 
KRUUK ET AL. 
1997 
310 of 389 
Large majority 
 
Changes in age composition 
recorded 
SIMPSON, 1998 
76 
100 
1.7:1 
Ratio pre 1993 = 0.9:1 
Ratio 1993-1996 = 2.2:1 
PHILCOX ET 
AL., 1999 
673 (571) 
100 
1.28:1 
 
HAUER ET AL., 
2002 
1067 
69.9 
 
No significant difference in 
mortality with time between the 
sexes. 
BRADSHAW & 
SLATER 2002 
415 
94 
1.6:1 
 
This study 
767 
98 
1.5:1 
 
 
* numbers of animals in sample that could be sexed. Sex ratio is therefore based on this sample. 
 
However any extrapolation of population structure and density from RTAs is flawed as 
the data are biased due to the method of collection, and this is demonstrated by studies of wild 
populations caught by other means (e.g. SIDOROVICH, 1991).  For instance, road casualties are 
normally recorded as the most common cause of death, either violent or non-violent.  This is 
because carcasses on roads tend to be easily seen and recorded, if not collected.  Animals killed 
by other causes, especially non-violent ones, may be exposed in areas not visited by humans, 
remain underground, or be washed away by currents or tides and so will not be recorded . 
It has been argued that roads are random killers, unlike natural causes which target the 
weak (usually the young or old) (KRUUK AND CONROY, 1991).  However, if road kills are truly 
indiscriminate, then there would be equal numbers of male and female casualties, (or at least a 


 
10
representation of the true wild ratio), but all of the studies listed below show a bias towards 
males.  This demonstrates that there must be a behavioural trait that makes males more 
vulnerable than females, possibly because males range further than females and that young males 
in particular have to travel further to establish home ranges (PHILCOX, GROGAN AND 
MACDONALD, 1999).  For instance, it has been suggested that more males are killed on roads in 
areas where populations are expanding, due to these animals leading the recolonisation.  
In contrast to road casualty studies, sex ratios when recorded for wild otters that have 
been studied using other methods of data collection, show a bias towards females (SIDOROVICH, 
1991), which is not explained in the casualty data (ANSORGE, SCHIPKE AND ZINKE, 1997).  In 
addition, the model created by ANSORGE, SCHIPKE AND ZINKE (1997), also shows a female bias. 
Although this may run counter to sex ratios recorded in other trapped species of mustelidae 
(BUSKIRK AND LINDSTEDT, 1989), this bias could explain the otter’s expansion in the face of an 
ever-increasing death toll.  The model provided by ANSORGE, SCHIPKE AND ZINKE (1997) shows 
a predominance of females surviving through to six or seven years, with an average of around 4.7 
years [this is higher than shown by KRUUK AND CONROY (1991)].  This intuitively makes sense; 
adult females, surviving to this age, would be able to produce two or three litters in their lifetime, 
possibly more.  This rate of production would be required for an expanding population, and is 
shown to be possible in populations that are harvested on a regular basis (SIDOROVICH, 1991). 
Another source of bias is the age structure of otters based on road casualty data.  The 
average age for wild otters is often quoted to be 3.1 years, from KRUUK AND CONROY, (1991) and 
SIMPSON, (1998) reports 2.9 years from casualties collected from south west England.  Although 
both figures describe the average age of otters submitted for post mortem examinations, they 
underestimate the percentage of older animals in the population, especially females, which are 
required if the population is to expand. KRUUK ET AL (1997) used road casualty data to determine 
changes in age composition of the otter population in Scotland. They found statistically 
significant declines in the ages of female otters killed in some parts of Scotland, such as the 
Grampian region, whereas the change was not noted on Shetland. It seems likely that this reflects 
an increase in recruitment rates following a population decline, but interestingly, the number of 
positive sites in this region has increased with each Scottish survey (GREEN AND GREEN, 1997). 
Using recent otter surveys of England and Wales, percentage site occupancy could be 
used as a crude indicator of density, to compare with road casualty data.  Unfortunately, otter 
road casualty data tend to reflect collection effort (PHILCOX, GROGAN AND MACDONALD, 1999; 
GROGAN, PHILCOX AND MACDONALD, 2001).  As a result, the numbers of RTAs in some areas are 
probably much lower than would be expected. This is then compounded by fewer road casualties 
in areas of low otter density, which limit the sample size.  There may be a difference in mortality 
structure of otters in areas of different otter density, but teasing out these differences considering 
the quality of the data is problematic at best.  This is particularly unfortunate as areas where otter 
density is low are of most interest to conservation, and the role played by road casualties is of 
particular interest.  
So, in conclusion, the data available, especially not in its current form, cannot help 
resolve the question of the effects of roads on otter populations.  The road casualty data alone do 
not provide enough information on population structure.  Therefore I make two 
recommendations: 
 
• That the current data, especially that held by the Environment Agency be pooled and that a 
thorough analysis be undertaken. This could then be used to construct a model similar to that 
used by ANSORGE, SCHIPKE AND ZINKE(1997). 


 
11
• That efforts be made to encourage research into wild otter populations in England, possibly 
looking at capture-mark-recapture, in order to provide a baseline on population structure.  
 
6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The paper follows on from a contract that was commissioned and funded by the Highways 
Agency.  Thanks go to many individuals for fielding our queries and requests for information, 
particularly Geoff Liles; Jim Green; Rosie Green; Jim Conroy; Hans Kruuk; Paul and Grace 
Yoxon, International Otter Survival Fund; James Williams, Somerset Wildlife Trust; Rob 
Strachan, WildCRU; Graham Roberts, Hampshire Wildlife Trust; Kate Stokes, Cornwall Wildlife 
Trust; Vic Simpson, Wildlife Veterinary Investigation Centre; Paul Chanin; Mary Rose Lane 
Graham Scholey, Lyn Jenkins, Teg Jones, Marlynne Good, Louise Pettit, Environment Agency; 
Adeline Bradshaw, Fred Slater, University of Cardiff. 
Thanks also to colleagues at the RSPCA for comments and allowing me the time to write 
and present this paper! 
 
 
7   REFERENCES 
 
ANSORGE, H., SCHIPKE, R. &  ZINKE, O. 1997 Population structure of the otter, Lutra lutra. Parameters and model 
for a Central European region. Zeitschrift für Säugetierkunde, 62: 143-151. 
BRADSHAW, A.V. AND SLATER, F.M. 2002 A Post mortem Study of Otters (Lutra lutra) in England and Wales. 
Environment Agency (Report W1-019/TR). Bristol. 
BUSKIRK, S.W. &  LINDSTEDT, S.L. 1989. Sex biases in trapped samples of Mustelidae. Journal of Mammalogy, 70: 
88-97. 
CASE. R.M. 1978. Interstate Highway Road Killed Animals: A data source for biologists. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 
6: 5-13. 
COXON, K., CHANIN, P., DALLAS, J. &  SYKES, T. 1999. The Use of DNA Fingerprinting to Study the Population of 
Otters (Lutra lutra) in southern Britain: A Feasibility Study. R&D Technical Report   W202. Environment Agency, 
Bristol. 
CRAWFORD, A. 2003. Fourth Otter Survey of England, 2000-2002. Environment Agency (Report W1-061/TR). 
Bristol. 
DREWS C. 1995 Road kills of animals by public traffic in Mikumi National Park, Tanzania, with notes on baboon 
mortality. African Journal of Ecology, 33: 89-100 
GREEN R. AND GREEN J.  1997 Otter Survey of Scotland, 1991-1994. The Vincent Wildlife Trust. 
GROGAN, A., PHILCOX, C. & MACDONALD D. 2001. Nature Conservation and Roads: Advice in Relation to Otters. 
Wildlife Conservation Research Unit, Oxford. 
HARRIS, S., MORRIS, P., WRAY, S. & YALDEN, D. 1995. A Review of British Mammals. Joint Nature Conservation 
Committee, Peterborough. 
HAUER, S., ANSORGE, H. & ZINKE, O. 2002. Mortality patterns of otters (Lutra lutra) from eastern Germany. 
Journal of Zoology, London, 256: 361-368. 
HEGGBERGET, T.M. 1991. Sex and age distribution in Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) killed by human activity. In: 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel1989. (Edited by Reuther, C. & Röcher, R.) 
Habitat, 6: 123-126. 
HIGHWAYS AGENCY. 1999. The Good Roads Guide: Nature conservation and advice in relation to otters. Design 
Manual for Roads and Bridges. The Stationery Office. London 
HOLSBEEK, L., RODTS, J. & MUYLDERMANS, S. 1999 Hedgehog and animal traffic victims in Belgium. Lutra, 42: 
111-119.  
HUIJSER M. 2000. Life on the Edge. Hedgehog Traffic Victims and Mitigation Strategies in an Anthropogenic 
Landscape. PhD Thesis, Waginingen University, Waginingen, The Netherlands. 


 
12
INBAR M. &  MAYER R.T. 1999 Spatio-temporal trends in armidillo diurnal activity and road kills in central Florida. 
Wildlife Society Bulletin, 27: 865-872 
JEFFERIES, D.J., WAYRE, P., JESSOP, R.M. & MITCHELL-JONES, A.J. 1986. Reinforcing the native otter (Lutra 
lutra) population in East Anglia: an analysis of the behaviour and range development of the first release group. 
Mammal Review, 16: 65-79. 
KÖRBEL O. 1994. Hindering otter (Lutra lutra) road kills. Part 1 IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bull. 10: 14-20. 
KRUUK, H. & CONROY, J.W.H. 1991. Mortality of otters (Lutra lutra) in Shetland. Journal of Applied Ecology, 28: 
83-94. 
KRUUK, H., JONES, C., MCLAREN, G.W., GORMAN, M.L. & CONROY, J.W.H. 1997. Changes in age composition 
in populations of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) in Scotland. Journal of Zoology, London, 243: 853-857.  
LINTERMANS M. & CUNNINGHAM R.B. 1999 Road-kills of the Eastern Grey Kangaroo (Macropus giganteus) in the 
Canberra 
urban 
area: 
A 
preliminary 
analysis. 
ACT 
Kangaroo 
report 
No.3. 
Appendix 
E. 
http://www.newcastle.edu.au/discipline/biology/marsupialcrc/actkanga3/appe.html 
MADSEN, A.B. 1996 Otter (Lutra lutra) mortality in relation to traffic, and experience with newly established fauna 
passages at existing road bridges. Lutra, 39: 76-89 
PHILCOX, C.K., GROGAN, A.L. & MACDONALD, D.W. 1999 Patterns of otter (Lutra lutra) road mortality in Britain. 
Journal of Applied Ecology, 36: 748-762. 
ROMIN, L.A.  & BISSONETTE, J.A. 1996 Deer-vehicle collisions. Status of state monitoring activities and mitigation 
efforts. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 24: 276-283 
SIDOROVICH, V.E. 1991. Structure, reproductive status and dynamics of the otter population in Byelorussia. Acta 
Theriologica, 36: 153-161. 
SIMPSON, V.R. 1998. A Post mortem Study of Otters (Lutra lutra) Found Dead in south west England. Environment 
Agency (Technical Report W148). Bristol. 
SJÖÅSEN, T. 1997. Movements and establishment of re-introduced European otters, Lutra lutra. Journal of Applied 
Ecology, 34: 1070-1080. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
