--- 
source: 2007.pdf
--- 

Diet of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) 
in relation to freshwater habitats and alien fish species 
in southern Italy
C. Prigioni 1, A. Balestrieri, L. Remonti, A. Gargaro and G. Priore
Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, Università di Pavia, Piazza Botta 9, 27100 Pavia, 
Italy
Received 2 February 2006, accepted 27 September 2006
The diet composition of otters in the upper catchment of the River Agri 
(southern Italy) was investigated by spraint analysis (N = 555) between May 
2001 and January 2003. Once a season, spraints were collected along four riv­
erine stretches, two with swift-waters and two with slow-waters. Overall, fish 
represented the dominant food (percent mean volume, Vm% = 57.30), followed 
by amphibians (Vm% = 18.90) and crayfish (Vm% = 15.60). The food composi­
tion of otters feeding along swift-water sections differed significantly from that 
recorded along slow-water sections. The trophic niche was larger for slow-water 
sections, because of the presence of more fish species. In both sampled habitats 
(swift- and slow-waters) the importance of fish decreased in winter when flood­
ing increasing water speeds and turbidity and thus reduced the hunting efficiency 
of the otters. Hibernating amphibians represented a primary alternative resource. 
As expected, insects and reptiles were eaten more frequently in summer, while 
birds predominated during their breeding season. Seasonal variation in fish con­
sumption could have been related to changes in fish activity and to environmen­
tal conditions, which influenced the availability of prey to the otters. For both 
habitats, trophic niche breadth showed a minimum value in autumn, when fish 
were dominant in the otters’ diet, whilst a peak was reached in summer for slow-
water sections and in spring for swift-water sections. Comparing three sampling 
periods (1989-1990, 1996-1997, 2001-2002), a time-lag of about 13 years seemed 
to have occurred between the introduction of centrarchids, mainly the large­
mouth bass (Micropterus salmoides), and their predation by otters. This relatively 
long lag phase could have been related to the pattern of alien fish invasion rather 
than to the inability of the otters to readily prey on newly available resources. 
Our results confirm the opportunistic feeding behaviour of the otter in Mediter­
ranean habitats, the species diet tending to match the seasonal and spatial varia­
tion in the relative abundance of different prey items.
key words: Lutra lutra, diet, alien fish, swift- and slow-waters, southern Italy.
Ethology Ecology & Evolution 18: 307-320, 2006
1 Corresponding author (E-mail: prigioni@unipv.it).


308
C. Prigioni et alii
Introduction		
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
308
Study area	
	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
309
Methods	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
310
Results	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
311
Discussion	
	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
315
Acknowledgements	 	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
317
References	
	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
.	
317
Introduction
The Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) is one of the most endangered Italian mam­
mal species (Amori et al. 1996). Its distribution has progressively reduced in the sec­
ond half of the 20th century and nowadays its presence is limited to the central and 
southern part of the peninsula, with two southern regions, Campania and Basilicata, 
accounting for more than 70% of the species range (Prigioni et al. 2005). Recently, 
partly thanks to the creation of some protected areas, it appears that the species is 
reappearing in new areas or reinforcing sporadic occurrences (Prigioni et al. 2005).
The River Agri (Basilicata region) hosts one of the main Italian otter popula­
tions (Prigioni et al. 2006a) and its upper course represents an important connec­
tion between the otter populations of the Campania region in the north and those 
of the Pollino massif in the south (Basilicata and Calabria regions). In this area 
the otter diet was investigated by spraint analysis at the end of the 1980s (Fuma­
galli 1991, Prigioni & Fumagalli 1992a) and in 1996-1997 (Priore & Sangiuliano 
1998, Gargaro 2003). Fumagalli (1991) reported the introduction of largemouth 
bass Micropterus salmoides, a species capable of rapid acclimatization (Lorenzoni 
et al. 1996).
Aquatic habitats are often exposed to management operations that can have 
drastic consequences for the distribution and numbers of native species (Moyle et 
al. 1986, Miller et al. 1989, Williams et al. 1989, Allan & Flecker 1993, Mason 
1995). Among them, biological invasions by alien fish species are known to reduce 
biodiversity and to alter the trophic webs of aquatic habitats (Welcomme 1984, 
Bianco 1990, Lassuy 1995).
Being at the top of the food chain, the otter is considered a good indicator 
of aquatic habitat health with changes in its diet reflecting variations in the avail­
ability of food resources (Kruuk 1995). Much information has been collected about 
otter diets (reviews in Mason & Macdonald 1986, Carss 1995, Prigioni 1997, Clav­
ero et al. 2003), whilst less is known about the effects of alien species invasion. 
Adrian & Delibes (1987) pointed out that the otter diet shifted from fish to alien 
crayfishes (Procambarus spp.) subsequent to their release in the Doñana National 
Park (Spain), suggesting that these crustaceans had significantly altered the forag­
ing behaviour of otters.
In this paper, we report the analysis of a sample of 555 spraints, collected in 
2001-2003, in order (i) to describe the otter diet composition in different riverine 
habitats (slow waters vs swift waters) of the upper catchment of the River Agri and 
(ii) to check possible time-variations in the otter trophic niche in relation to the 
introduction of largemouth bass. In particular we tried to ascertain if and to what 
extent the otter would have taken advantage of this new uncharted resource and if 
otter diet analysis could be a useful tool to point out the potential negative effects 
of such introductions on the native fish assemblages.


309
Otter diet and alien fish species
Study area
The study was centred on the upper valley (about 600 km2, Basilicata region) of the 
River Agri (total length: 136 km). The river rises on the slopes of Mounts Maruggio and 
Volturino (southern Apennines) flowing into the Ionian Sea. At 1/3 of its course, the river is 
dammed, forming an artificial lake (Lake Pertusillo, about 4.5 km2), which represented the 
downstream limit of our study area. Two tributaries (Rivers Cavolo and Maglia) of the upper 
River Agri were also investigated. During the study period, the flow of the rivers varied mark­
edly, with peaks in spring, following prolonged precipitation and snow-melt.
Riverside woods consist of poplars (Populus alba, P. nigra), alder (Alnus glutinosa) and 
willows (Salix spp.). Dry soils are mainly covered with oaks (Quercus cerris, Q. frainetto). Land 
use is predominantly pasture and extensive agriculture.
In November 2001 and, partially (only for sampling sites 4 and 7, see Fig. 1), in August 
2002, sampling by electro-fishing allowed us to gather information about fish assemblages. Of 
a total of 180 fish caught in November, nine species were found with the following percentage 
frequency: trout Salmo trutta (11.1%), roach Rutilus rubilio (27.8%), chub Leuciscus cephalus 
(5.6%), bleak Alburnus alburnus arborella and A. albidus (12.8%), barbel Barbus meridiona­
lis and B. plebejus (30.0%), largemouth bass Micropterus salmoides (11.1%) and pumpkinseed 
Lepomis gibbosus (1.6%). Trout represented the unique fish species in the River Cavolo and 
in the upper part of the River Maglie, barbel predominated in the lowest sampling station 
of the River Agri, whilst the largemouth bass and pumpkinseed replaced the native fauna of 
the stretches near to Lake Pertusillo in both River Agri and River Maglie (Fig. 1; Table 1). 
In August the fish fauna of these last stretches included, respectively cyprinids and trout. An 
introduction of largemouth bass (total weight: 10 kg), a species native to the mid-western and 
south-eastern United States and north-eastern Mexico (Heidinger 1975), occurred in the Lake 
Pertusillo in 1988 (Fumagalli 1991) for angling. The pumpkinseed, whose native distribution 
is restricted to eastern North America (Scott & Crossman 1973), was probably inadvertently 
introduced together with the largemouth bass, such unintentional introductions of pumpkin­
seeds are probably common in Europe (Copp et al. 2004). No other successive legal introduc­
tion is known to have occurred.
Prigioni et al. (2006a) reported for the catchment basin of the River Agri (237 km) the 
presence of 43-47 otters. Considering the overall length of our monitored watercourses to be 
44 km (Fig. 1), our study area should be able to support 8-9 otters.
Fig. 1. — Study area with the four river stretches (in bold) where otter spraints were collected 
and the sites (numbered dots) where samplings by electrofishing were performed in 2003.


310
C. Prigioni et alii
Methods
From May 2001 to January 2003, four stretches (average length = 0.825 km, min-max 
= 0.7-1.0, SD = 0.13; average minimum distance between stretches = 8.98 km, min-max = 3.3-
15.1, SD = 5.34) were seasonally investigated using the widely applied standard method (Lenton 
et al. 1980, Mason & Macdonald 1994), collecting a total of 555 otter spraints for diet analysis. 
Sampling transects (Fig. 1) included two flat, 5-10 m wide, slow-water sections, called “Agri” 
(Number of collected spraints: N = 189, sprainting sites/100m: SS/100m = 1.56, spraints/100m: 
S/100m = 2.63) and “Maglia 2” (N = 212, SS/100m = 2.27, S/100m = 4.6), both just upstream 
from Lake Pertusillo, and two swift-water, 4-7 m wide, oligotrophic sections (“Maglia 1”, N = 
86, SS/100m = 1.2, S/100m = 1.71; “Cavolo”, N = 68, SS/100m = 1.00, S/100m = 1.72). 
Spraints were stored in silver paper, labelled and frozen (– 20 °C). For analysis, they 
were washed through a sieve of 0.5 mm mesh and gently broken up by hand under a bin­
ocular microscope. Fish remains were identified from their vertebrae, jawbones and scales, 
using personal collections and the keys of different authors (Webb 1976, Wise 1980, Camby et 
al. 1984, Prigioni 1997). Reptiles and amphibians were identified by the keys of Di Palma & 
Massa (1981), while mammal hairs were compared at 20 × and 40 × magnifications with the 
keys of Debrot et al. (1982). The undigested remains of insects (wings, legs and cuticle parts) 
were identified using personal collections.
We assumed that each prey identified in a particular transect was consumed there, 
although otters may move over long distances (Green et al. 1984, Kruuk et al. 1993, Prigioni 
et al. 2006b). However this assumption is conservative since the mixture of spraints among 
different transects would tend to soften the possible spatial patterns in the otters’ diet (Clav­
ero et al. 2004).
For each faecal sample, the total numbers and the bulk of each kind of prey as ingested 
by the otter were counted or estimated according to Kruuk & Parish (1981). With regard to 
fish, the length of jawbones (see Radke et al. 2000, Háiková et al. 2003) found in the spraints 
was related to fish length by a linear regression (y = a + bx), and, successively, fish length was 
related to fish weight by an exponential regression (y = a xb) (Prigioni et al. 2003). The knowl­
edge of the size of preyed fish allowed a more accurate estimate of the relative volume of fish 
ingested.
Following Prigioni (1991) results were then expressed as percent frequency of occur­
rence (F% = number of spraints containing a specific food items/total number of examined 
Table 1.
Composition of the fish assemblage for seven sampling sites (see Fig. 1) representative of the study 
area (data gathered by electrofishing in November 2001).
Sampling sites
Fish species
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
n
%
n
%
n
%
n
%
n
%
n
%
n
%
Salmo trutta
10
100
1
3.6
8
100
1
10
Rutilus rubilio
18
51.4
25
89.3
7
9.3
Leuciscus cephalus
10
13.3
Alburnus spp.
15
42.8
8
10.7
Barbus spp.
2
0.8
2
7.1
50
66.7
Micropterus salmoides
12
85.7
8
80
Lepomis gibbosus
2
14.3
1
10


311
Otter diet and alien fish species
spraints × 100), percent relative frequency of occurrence (RF% = number of occurrences of an 
item/total number of items × 100), estimated percent volume (V% = total estimated volume of 
each food item as ingested/number of spraints containing that item) and percent medium vol­
ume (Vm% = total estimated volume of each food item as ingested/total number of examined 
spraints). 
Data were grouped annually and seasonally (winter: I-III; spring: IV-VI; summer: VII-IX; 
autumn: X-XII) in order to investigate time variations. Trophic niche breadth was estimated 
by Levins’ index (“B”; Feinsinger et al. 1981), using RF and grouping data in 14 main 
categories. 
The effect of fish introduction on the otters’ diet was evaluated from the raw data col­
lected in 1989-1990 (Fumagalli 1991, Prigioni & Fumagalli 1992b) and in 1996-1997 (Priore 
& Sangiuliano 1998, Gargaro 2003). These data related to a 15 km long stretch of the River 
Agri centred on Lake Pertusillo and they were selected to allow a proper comparison with our 
analysis. Lake Pertusillo represents an attractive source of food, particularly in dry seasons, 
when the river flow downstream from the dam is drastically reduced.
The raw frequency data (F%) from the otters’ diet were compared using χ2 test for dif­
ferent watercourse characteristics (slow- and swift-waters), seasons and periods of study. 
Because of the great number of repeated tests on related data, the level of significance was 
calculated by the Standard Bonferroni method as the ratio between α = 0.05 and the number 
of tests run (Rice 1989). Spearman’s rank correlation test was used to compare the seasonal 
consumption of the otters’ main food items in the overall diet recorded in 2001-2003.
Results
On the whole, fish were the main food source for otters, followed by amphib­
ians and crustaceans, the three food categories together amounting to about the 
92% of the whole diet (Fig. 2; Table 2). Birds, mainly rallids, and snakes were items 
Fig. 2. — Diet of otters in the upper catchment of the River Agri in 2001-2003. Estimated vol­
ume (V% = y) of the otters’ food categories, whenever eaten, vs their frequency of occurrence 
(F% = x). Isopleths connect points of equal relative volume (Vm%) in the overall diet.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cyprinids
Amphibians
Salmonids
Crustaceans
Reptiles
Insects
Fish
1
5
10
20
50
F%
V%
Birds
Vm%
Centrarchids
Mammals


312
C. Prigioni et alii
of secondary importance, while insects and mammals were eaten only occasionally. 
Seasonal variations occurred both for main and secondary trophic sources. Insects 
(χ2 = 17.9; P < 0.001) and reptiles (χ2 = 16.1; P = 0.001) were eaten more frequently 
in summer, whilst amphibians predominated in winter (χ2 = 83.5; P < 0.001), when 
fish consumption decreased. On the whole, the seasonal consumption of frogs was 
inversely correlated to that of fish (Spearman test, N = 12, rs = – 0.881, P < 0.0001).
Grouping data according to watercourse characteristics (Agri + Maglia 2 vs 
Cavolo + Maglia 1), cyprinids represented the main food item in slow-water sec­
tions, whilst salmonids and amphibians formed the bulk of the otters’ diet in swift-
water stretches (Fig. 3). 
Fish predation was dominant in slow-water sections (χ2 = 32.5; P < 0.001), 
the frequency of occurrence of cyprinids (χ2 = 91.0; P < 0.001) and centrarchids (χ2 
= 55.1; P < 0.001) being, as expected, higher compared to the swift-water stretch­
Table 2.
Overall diet of the otter in the upper catchment of the River Agri in 2001-2003. For abbreviations 
see Methods; number of spraints: 555; number of items: 984.
Food items
N
F%
RF%
V%
Vm%
Insects
42
7.6
4.3
6.7
0.5
Coleoptera
39
7.0
4.0
6.7
0.5
Hymenoptera
3
0.5
0.3
5.0
0.1
Crustaceans
136
24.5
13.8
63.7
15.6
Potamon fluviatilis fluviatile
18
3.2
1.8
25.6
0.8
Austropotamobius pallipes
129
23.2
13.1
63.6
14.8
Fish
409
73.7
41.6
77.7
57.3
Centrarchids
114
20.5
11.6
60.9
12.5
Salmonids
152
27.4
15.4
58.5
16.0
Cyprinids
208
37.5
21.1
64.9
24.3
Barbus spp.
33
5.9
3.3
49.5
2.9
Rutilus rubilio
77
13.9
7.8
44.0
6.1
Leuciscus cephalus
88
15.7
8.9
64.9
10.3
Tinca tinca
1
0.2
0.1
95.0
0.2
Alburnus spp.
2
0.4
0.2
55.0
0.2
Cyprinus carpio
20
3.6
2.0
73.0
2.6
Unidentified Cyprinids 
31
5.6
3.1
34.1
1.8
Cobitis taenia
5
0.9
0.5
37.0
0.3
Unidentified fish
35
6.3
3.6
53.1
3.2
Amphibians (Rana spp.)
172
31.0
17.5
61.0
18.8
Reptiles (Natrix spp.)
31
5.6
3.1
62.9
3.5
Birds
33
5.9
3.3
84.6
4.9
Rallidae
21
3.8
2.1
84.0
3.2
Passeriformes
10
1.8
1.0
82.8
1.5
Mammals
3
0.5
0.4
100.0
0.5


313
Otter diet and alien fish species
es. No significant difference emerged in the frequency of occurrence of food items 
between the two slow-water sampling transects. 
Along swift-water sections, besides salmonids (χ2 = 68.1; P < 0.001), secondary 
food sources, such as insects (χ2 = 30.2; P < 0.001), reptiles (χ2 = 30.6; P < 0.001) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cyprinids
Amphibians
Salmonids
Crustaceans
Reptiles
Insects
Fish
1%
5%
10%
20%
50%
F%
V%
Birds
Vm%
Centrarchids
Mammals
Slow-waters
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cyprinids
Amphibians
Salmonids
Crustaceans
Reptiles
Insects
Fish
1%
5%
10%
20%
50%
F%
V%
Birds
Vm%
Swift-waters
Fig. 3. — Diet of otters at slow-water and swift-water segments: estimated volume (V% = y) of 
the otters’ food categories, whenever eaten, vs their frequency of occurrence (F% = x). Isop­
leths connect points of equal relative volume (Vm%) in the overall diet.


314
C. Prigioni et alii
and birds (χ2 = 18.9; P < 0.001), were eaten more frequently with respect to slow-
water stretches. Some differences emerged between the two swift-water sampling 
transects, amphibians prevailing in the otters’ diet for Maglia 1 (χ2 = 7.9; P = 0.005) 
and birds for the River Cavolo (χ2 = 24.1; P < 0.001).
Trophic niche breadth was wider for slow-water sections (B = 0.60) compared 
with swift-water ones (B = 0.36).
In the two upstream stretches, trout were more preyed upon in summer, whilst 
birds occurred more frequently in spring (Table 3). In the two downstream sections, 
fish consumption peaked in autumn, when centrarchids prevailed in otters’ diet, 
whilst it reached a minimum in winter. Among cyprinids some differences occurred 
at the species level, roach and chub being taken more frequently in spring, bar­
bel in autumn and common carp in summer (Table 3). Trophic niche breadth was 
narrower in autumn for both habitats (Bslow-waters = 0.18; Bswift-waters = 0.25), whilst a 
peak was reached in spring for slow-water sections (B = 0.41) and in summer for 
swift-water ones (B = 0.57).
Diet changes in the three 2-year periods of investigation involved crustaceans, 
with a peak in 1996-1997, centrarchids and common carp, whose consumption 
sharply increased in 2001-2002, and roach, which showed an opposite trend with 
respect to alien fish (Table 4).
Table 3.
Seasonal variations in the otters’ diet at swift- and slow-water stretches (* = P < 0.05; ** = P < 0.01; 
*** = P < 0.001).
Food items
F% swift-water segments
F% slow-water segments
Spring Summer Autumn
Winter
χ2
Spring Summer Autumn
Winter
χ2
Insects
12.8
29.4
0.0
3.0
13.4*
4.1
7.3
0.0
2.8
8.0
Crustaceans
29.8
19.1
66.7
36.4
8.3
24.8
32.1
17.2
15.3
9.6
Fish
48.9
73.5
83.3
27.3
22.3***
79.3
80.7
90.9
66.7
15.6*
Centrarchids
0.0
29.4
80.8
2.8
204.9***
Trout
44.7
72.1
66.7
21.2
25.0***
12.4
25.7
17.2
15.3
7.4
Cyprinids
12.8
2.9
0.0
3.0
6.0
62.8
41.3
39.4
54.2
16.2*
Barbel
5.0
6.4
1.0
26.4
40.5***
Roach
31.4
4.6
12.1
20.8
31.4***
Chub
35.5
22.0
9.1
15.3
24.7***
Carp
2.5
11.9
0.0
5.6
17.9**
Amphibians
14.9
35.3
16.7
72.7
31.9***
36.4
28.4
3.0
52.8
67.4***
Reptiles
12.8
17.6
0.0
12.1
1.8
1.6
6.4
0.0
0.0
12.8
Birds
40.4
0.0
0.0
3.0
45.2***
0.0
3.7
3.0
8.3
10.1
Mammals
0.8
0.0
0.0
2.8
5.6
Number
   of spraints
47
68
6
33
121
109
99
72


315
Otter diet and alien fish species
Discussion
In the River Agri catchment the otter behaves as a generalist predator, as sug­
gested by several studies throughout Europe (Jenkins et al. 1979, Erlinge & Jensen 
1981, Kruuk & Moorhouse 1990, Sulkava 1996, Carss et al. 1998, Clavero et al. 
2003, Lanszki & Molnar 2003, Ottino & Giller 2004). On the whole, fish, particu­
larly cyprinids, represent the main trophic source, but otters feed opportunistically 
on a wide range of other prey (e.g., crayfish, crabs and frogs) living in riverine habi­
tats. Among them, frogs are the main alternative resource, as reported for most of 
the studies carried out in southern Italy (see Prigioni 1997 for a review, Prigioni et 
al. 2002).
Reptiles, insects and birds are eaten according to their expected seasonal 
availability (the first two in summer, the last at breeding time) suggesting that otters 
feed opportunistically on these rarely used resources rather than at times when the 
availability of their preferred prey is reduced, as suggested by Clavero et al. (2003).
The use of different fish species seems to reflect their spatial availability, sug­
gesting a good correspondence between the site of feeding and that of spraint dep­
osition: cyprinids are widely eaten along slow-water stretches, whilst salmonids 
prevail in swift-waters. Along swift-waters, supporting poorer fish assemblages in 
terms of species richness and, presumably, biomass, the otters’ diet more frequently 
contained secondary food items. These results are in accord with those of Remonti 
Table 4.
Changes in the otters’ diet (food items expressed as F%) as seen in three successive 2-year samplings 
for the upper catchment of the River Agri (* = P < 0.05; ** = P < 0.01; *** = P < 0.001).
Food items
1989-1990
1996-1997
2001-2002
χ2
Insects
3.3
0.5
2.1
2.9
Crustaceans
11.7
37.8
25.9
16.8**
Fish
90.0
77.7
83.1
5.0
Centrarchids
0.0
0.5
36.0
103.9***
Trout
3.3
12.4
15.9
6.5
Cyprinids
56.7
64.8
52.4
6.1
Barbel
6.7
3.6
10.0
6.2
Roach
50.0
48.7
15.9
52.3***
Chub
26.7
19.2
14.3
5.0
Bleak
0.0
1.5
0.5
1.7
Common carp
0.0
0.0
9.0
23.7***
Amphibians
18.3
7.2
15.9
8.7
Reptiles
6.7
1.0
1.1
9.2
Birds
0.0
0.0
3.7
9.5
Number of spraints
60
193
189


316
C. Prigioni et alii
et al. (submitted) for neighbouring areas, where fish consumption and fish biomass 
estimated by electrofishing were significantly correlated. Nonetheless, trophic niche 
breadth was higher for slow-water segments where the fish assemblage was more 
diversified.
In the Mediterranean region, drought results in a highly patchy mosaic of 
residual water surfaces, consisting of relatively deep pools connected by poorly flow­
ing streams or dry channels. Assemblage structure and the spatial distribution of 
fish are strongly affected by these environmental conditions, which reduce suitable 
micro-habitats for fish and determine their congregation in residual water covered 
surfaces (Magalhães et al. 2002). Contrary to the report of Ruiz-Olmo et al. (2001) 
for Iberian Mediterranean habitats, in our study area, as in other areas of southern 
Italy (Prigioni et al. 2003), in the dry season otters widely rely on fish, pools repre­
senting a dispersed but rich and easily exploit resource for the the otters.
On the contrary, in both swift- and slow-water sections, fish consumption 
decreases in winter/spring, when the river flood reaches a peak as a consequence 
of rainfall and snow melt, suggesting that fish availability and/or the otters’ preda­
tion efficiency are lowered by increased water speed and turbidity. These effects are 
probably exacerbated by extensive river straightening and canalisation. In the same 
period, frogs gather along watercourses to hibernate and breed (Weber 1990), rep­
resenting an important alternative resource for otters.
Seasonal variations in the predation on different fish could be related to 
changes in fish activity and environmental conditions, which influence the avail­
ability of prey for otters. Particularly, alien fish predominate in the otters’ diet in 
autumn. The largemouth bass and the pumpkinseed prefer deep slow-water hab­
itats, but both species tolerate swift oligotrophic waters (Copp 1993, Cerný et al. 
2003) and can also exploit shallow waters (Bruno & Maugeri 1992). In accordance 
with the selection shown by the otters, in the two sampling transects near the lake, 
electro-fishing revealed a sharp predominance of largemouth bass in autumn com­
pared to summer.
Otters are thought to be able to readily prey on new resources (see Delibes & 
Adrian 1987 and Correia 2001 about introduced crayfish), nevertheless in 1996-1997, 
8 years after their introduction, centrarchids still represented a negligible fraction 
of the otters’ diet, with their frequency of occurrence increasing statistically only in 
2001-2002. However diet data are in accord with the observations of fishermen, who, 
starting from 2000 noticed a richer catch of largemouth bass and its progressive colo­
nization of the last sections of the rivers flowing into the Lake Pertusillo (where alien 
fish occupied microhabitats usually exploited by the trout). In these terms our data 
suggest that otters switched to this new prey when its profitability increased — i.e. 
after the onset of invasiveness, which usually takes some time after the introduction 
(Crooks & Soulé 1999) — confirming an opportunistic feeding pattern.
Less is known about the common carp, which was probably introduced in the 
Agri basin long ago, but which only recently seems to have become a desirable prey 
for otters.
The roach is one of the otters’ preferred preys in southern Italy (Prigioni 
1997). The sharp fall in its frequency of occurrence in 2001-2002, corresponding 
to the increase in centrarchid consumption, suggests that the expansion of one or 
both alien species could have negatively influenced the population dynamics of this 
small cyprinid, which, suffering competition from the larger cyprinids for animal 
food (Zerunian 1984a, 1984b; Balestrieri et al. 2006), has become the more vulner­
able species of the fish assemblage.


317
Otter diet and alien fish species
Hence both the largemouth bass (He et al. 1994, Hickley et al. 1994, Godinho 
et al. 1997) and the pumpkinseed (Zapata & Granado-Lorencio 1993, Godinho et al. 
1997, Wolfram-Wais et al. 1999), being opportunistic non-selective predators, have 
been involved in the decline of some indigenous fish species (Alessio 1983, Godinho 
& Ferreira 1998, Copp et al. 2004). Specifically, this decline has arisen from preda­
tion on young fish and eggs together with competition for food.
The introduction of fish species can significantly alter the trophic web of 
freshwater habitats (Adrian & Delibes 1987, Delibes & Adrian 1987, Beja 1996), 
with unpredictable long-term consequences (Correia 2001). The otter appears to be 
able to successfully face the effects of inconsiderate riverine and fishery manage­
ment because of its ability to adopt its feeding behaviour. On the other hand, the 
preservation of the native fish species and the biodiversity of riverine ecosystems 
needs more surveillance and further investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank Silvia Sgrosso for assisting with the field work. Jim Conroy, Anna Loy, 
Christopher Mason and an anonymous referee improved the manuscript with their comments 
and suggestions.
References
Adrian M.I. & Delibes M. 1987. Food habits of the otter (Lutra lutra) in two habitats of the 
Doñana National Park, SW Spain. Journal of Zoology, London 212: 399-406.
Alessio G. 1983. Le black-bass, Micropterus salmoides (Lacép.), dans les eaux italiennes. Un 
antagoniste du Brochet? Bulletin Français de la Pêche et de la Pisciculture 292: 1-17.
Allan J.D. & Flecker A.S. 1993. Biodiversity conservation in running waters: identifying the 
major factors that threaten destruction of riverine species and ecosystems. BioScience 
43: 32-43.
Amori G., Angelici F.M., Prigioni C. & Vigna Taglianti A. 1996. The mammal fauna of Italy: a 
review. Hystrix 8: 3-7.
Balestrieri A., Prigioni C., Remonti L., Sgrosso S. & Priore G. 2006. Feeding ecology of Leu­
ciscus cephalus and Rutilus rubilio in southern Italy. Italian Journal of Zoology 73 (2): 
129-135.
Beja P.R. 1996. An analysis on otter Lutra lutra predation on introduced American crayfish 
Procambarus clarkii in Iberian streams. Journal of Applied Ecology 33: 1156-1170.
Bianco P.G. 1990. Vanishing freshwater fishes in Italy. Journal of Fish Biology 37A (Suppl.): 
235-237.
Bruno S. & Maugeri S. 1992. Pesci d’acqua dolce. Atlante d’Europa. Le Guide di Airone. Gior­
gio Mondadori Editore.
Camby A., Le Gall O. & Maizeret C. 1984. Atlas d’identification des restes alimentaires de la 
Loutre (premiers éléments). Groupe Loutres, Bulletin de Liaison, 16.
Carss D.N. 1995. Foraging behaviour and feeding ecology of the otter Lutra lutra: a selective 
review. In: Prigioni C., Edit. Biology and conservation of mustelids. Proceedings II Ital­
ian Symposium on Carnivores. Hystrix (N.S.) 7: 179-194.
Carss D.N., Nelson K.C., Bacon P.J. & Kruuk H. 1998. Otter (Lutra lutra L.) prey selection in 
relation to fish abundance and community structure in two different freshwater habi­
tats. In: Dunstone N. & Gorman M., Edits. Behaviour and ecology of riparian mam­
mals. Symposium of the Zoological Society of London 71: 191-214.


318
C. Prigioni et alii
Cerný J., Copp G.H., Kováè V., Gozlan R.E. & Vilizzi L. 2003. Initial impact of the Gabèíkovo 
hydroelectric scheme on 0+ fish assemblages in the Slovak flood plain, River Danube. 
River Research and Applications 19: 749-766.
Clavero M., Prenda J. & Delibes M. 2003. Trophic diversity of the otter (Lutra lutra L.) 
in temperate and Mediterranean freshwater habitats. Journal of Biogeography 30: 
761-769.
Clavero M., Prenda J. & Delibes M. 2004. Influence of spatial heterogeneity on coastal otter 
(Lutra lutra) prey consumption. Annales Zoologici Fennici 41: 551-561.
Copp G.H. 1993. The upper River Rhône revisited: an empirical model of microhabitat use by 
0+ juvenile fishes. Folia Zoologica 42: 329-340. 
Copp G.H., Fox M.G., Przybylski M., Godinho F.N. & Vila-Gispert A. 2004. Life-time growth 
patterns of pumpkinseed Lepomis gibbosus introduced to Europe, relative to native 
North American populations. Folia Zoologica 53: 237-254.
Correia A.M. 2001. Seasonal and interspecific evaluation of predation by mammals and birds 
on the introduced red swamp crayfish Procambarus clarkii (Crustacea, Cambaridae) in a 
freshwater marsh (Portugal). Journal of Zoology, London 255: 533-541.
Crooks J.A. & Soulé M.E. 1999. Lag times in population explosions of invasive species: caus­
es and implications, pp. 103-125. In: Sandlund O.T. et al., Edits. Invasive species and 
biodiversity management. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Debrot S., Fival G., Mermod C. & Weber J.M. 1982. Atlas des poils mammifères d’Europe. 
Institut de Zoologie, Université de Neuchâtel.
Delibes M. & Adrian I. 1987. Effects of crayfish introduction on otter Lutra lutra food in the 
Doñana National Park, SW Spain. Biological Conservation 42: 153-159.
Di Palma M.G. & Massa B. 1981. Contributo metodologico per lo studio dell’alimentazione dei 
rapaci. Atti I Convegno Italiano di Ornitologia: 69-76.
Erlinge S. & Jensen B. 1981. The diet of otters Lutra lutra L. in Denmark. Natura Jutlandica 
19: 161-165.
Feinsinger P., Spers E.E. & Poole R.W. 1981. A simple measure of niche breadth. Ecology 62: 
27-32.
Fumagalli R. 1991. Aspetti dell’ecologia della Lontra (Lutra lutra) in Basilicata. Tesi di Laurea 
Università di Milano, 110 pp.
Gargaro A. 2003. Spettro trofico e attività di marcamento della Lontra (Lutra lutra) nell’alta 
val d’Agri. Tesi di Laurea Università di Parma, 76 pp.
Godinho F.N. & Ferreira M.T. 1998. The relative influences of exotic species and environ­
mental factors on an Iberian native fish community. Environmental Biology of Fishes 51: 
41-51.
Godinho F.N., Ferreira M.T. & Cortes R.V. 1997. The environmental basis of diet variation in 
pumpkinseed sunfish, Lepomis gibbosus, and largemouth bass, Micropterus salmoides, 
along an Iberian river basin. Environmental Biology of Fishes 50: 105-115.
Green J., Green R. & Jefferies D.J. 1984. A radio-tracking survey of otters Lutra lutra on a 
Perthshire river system. Lutra 27: 85-145.
Hájková P., Roche K. & Kocian L. 2003. On the use of diagnostic bones of brown trout, Salmo 
trutta m. fario, grayling, Thymallus thymallus and Carpathian sculpin, Cottus poecilopus 
in Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra diet analysis. Folia Zoologica 52 (4): 389-398.
He X., Hodgson J.R., Kitchell J.F. & Wright R.A. 1994. Growth and diet composition of 
largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) from four experimental lakes. Verhandlungen 
der Internationalen Vereinigung für Theoretische und Angewandte Limnologie 25: 92-97.
Heidinger R. 1975. Life history and biology of the largemouth bass, pp. 11-20. In: Stroud 
R.H. & Clepper H., Edits. Black bass biology and management. Washington, D.C.: Sport 
Fishing Institute.
Hickley P., North R., Muchiri S.M. & Harper D.M. 1994. The diet of largemouth bass, Micro­
pterus salmoides, in Lake Naivasha, Kenya. Journal of Fish Biology 44: 607-619.
Jenkins D., Walker J. & Mccowan G.K. 1979. Analyses of otter (Lutra lutra) faeces from Dee­
side, N.E. Scotland. Journal of Zoology, London 177: 486-491.
Kruuk H. 1995. Wild Otters. Predation and populations. Oxford University Press, 290 pp.


319
Otter diet and alien fish species
Kruuk H., Carss D.N., Conroy J.W.H. & Durbin L. 1993. Otter (Lutra lutra L.) numbers and 
fish productivity in rivers in north-east Scotland. Symposium of the Zoological Society, 
London 65: 171-191.
Kruuk H. & Moorhouse A. 1990. Seasonal and spatial differences in food selection by otters 
(Lutra lutra) in Shetland. Journal of Zoology, London 221: 621-637.
Kruuk H. & Parish T. 1981. Feeding specialization of the European badger (Meles meles) in 
Scotland. Journal of Animal Ecology 50: 773-788.
Lanszki J. & Molnar T. 2003. Diet of otters living in three different habitats in Hungary. Folia 
Zoologica 52: 378-388.
Lassuy D.R. 1995. Introduced species as a factor in extinction and endangerment of native 
fish species. American Fisheries Society Symposium 15: 391-396.
Lenton E.J., Chanin P.R.F. & Jefferies D.J. 1980. Otter survey of England 1977-79. London: 
Nature Conservancy Council.
Lorenzoni M., Carosi A., Dörr A.J.M., Giovinazzo G., Petesse M.L. & Mearelli M. 1996. 
Accrescimento di Micropterus salmoides (Lacépède) nel lago Trasimeno e nell’invaso di 
Montedoglio. Atti VI Convegno AIIAD: 177-188.
Magalhães M.F., Beja P., Canas C. & Collares-Pereira M.J. 2002. Functional heterogeneity of 
dry-season fish refugia across a Mediterranean catchment: the role of habitat and pre­
dation. Freshwater Biology 47: 1919-1934.
Mason C.F. 1995. Habitat quality, water quality and otter distribution. In: Prigioni C., Edit. 
Proceedings II Italian Symposium on Carnivores. Hystrix (N.S.) 3: 51-62.
Mason C.F. & Macdonald S.M. 1986. Otters: Ecology and conservation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 236 pp.
Mason C.F. & Macdonald S.M. 1994. Status and conservation needs of the otter (Lutra lutra) 
in the western Paleartic. Nature Environment 67, Council of Europe, Strasbourg. 
Miller R.R., Williams J.D. & Williams J.E. 1989. Extinctions of North American fishes during 
the past century. Fisheries 14: 22-38.
Moyle P.B., Brown L.R. & Herbold B. 1986. Final report on development and preliminary 
tests of indices of biotic integrity for California. Final Report to the US Environmental 
Protection Agency, Environmental Research Laboratory, Corvallis, Oregon.
Ottino P. & Giller P. 2004. Distribution, density, diet and habitat use of the otter in relation 
to land use in the Araglin valley, southern Ireland. Biology and Environment: Proceed­
ings of the Royal British Academy 104B (1): 1-17.
Prigioni C. 1991. Lo studio della dieta della Volpe (Vulpes vulpes). In: Prigioni C., Edit. Atti I 
Simposio Italiano sui Carnivori. Hystrix (N.S.) 3: 51-62.
Prigioni C. 1997. La Lontra. Una vita silenziosa negli ambienti acquatici. Bologna: Edagricole 
171 pp.
Prigioni C., Balestrieri A., Remonti L., Sgrosso S. & Priore G. 2006a. How many otters are 
there in Italy? Hystrix (N.S.) 17 (1): 29-36.
Prigioni C. & Fumagalli R. 1992a. Nicchia trofica e preferenze alimentari della Lontra (Lutra 
lutra) nei fiumi Agri e Basento (Basilicata). 54° Congresso UZI Riassunti, 59.
Prigioni C. & Fumagalli R. 1992b. La Lontra: status e conservazione in Italia. In: La Lontra: 
specie minacciata in Italia. Ricerche in natura ed in cattività finalizzate alla sua con­
servazione. Ministero Agricoltura e Foreste, Collana Verde 89: 1-27.
Prigioni C., Remonti L. & Balestrieri A. 2006b. Otter Lutra lutra movements assessed by gen­
otyped spraints in southern Italy. Hystrix (N.S.) 17 (1): 91-96.
Prigioni C., Remonti L., Balestrieri A., Sgrosso S. & Priore G. 2005. Variazione dell’areale 
italiano della Lontra (Lutra lutra) negli ultimi 100 anni. Hystrix, Suppl.: 27.
Prigioni C., Sgrosso S., Remonti L. & Balestrieri A. 2002. Primi dati sulla dieta della Lontra 
(Lutra lutra) nel Parco Nazionale del Pollino. 63° Congresso Nazionale U.Z.I, Riassunti 
dei contributi scientifici, 91.
Prigioni C., Sgrosso S., Remonti L., Balestrieri A., Priore G., Randi E., Bergonzi E. & 
Romagnoli L. 2003. Ecologia e conservazione della Lontra (Lutra lutra) nel Parco del 
Pollino. Dipartimento di Biologia Animale Università di Pavia e Ente Parco Nazionale del 
Pollino, 52 pp. 


320
C. Prigioni et alii
Priore G. & Sangiuliano A. 1998. Dati preliminari su una popolazione di Lontra (Lutra lutra 
L.) nell’alto corso del fiume Agri (Basilicata). In: I Mammiferi in Italia: status, tendenze 
e implicazioni gestionali. II Congresso Italiano di Teriologia Riassunti, 138.
Radke R.J., Petzoldt T. & Wolter C. 2000. Suitability of pharyngeal bone measures common­
ly used for reconstruction of prey fish length. Journal of Fish Biology 57: 961-967.
Remonti L., Prigioni C., Balestrieri A., Sgrosso S. & Priore G. (submitted). Trophic flexibil­
ity of the otter (Lutra lutra) in southern Italy. Canadia Jouranal of Zoology.
Rice W.R. 1989. Analysing tables of statistical tests. Evolution 43: 223-225.
Ruiz-Olmo J., Lopez-Martin J.M. & Palazon S. 2001. The influence of fish abundance on the 
otter (Lutra lutra) populations in Iberian Mediterranean habitats. Journal of Zoology, 
London 254: 325-336.
Scott W.B. & Crossman E.J. 1973. Freshwater fishes of Canada. Fisheries Research Board of 
Canada, Bulletin No. 184.
Sulkava R. 1996. Diet of otters Lutra lutra in central Finland. Acta Theriologica 41: 395-408.
Webb J.B. 1976. Otter spraint analisys. The Mammal Society, Reading.
Weber J.M. 1990. Seasonal exploitation of amphibians by otters (Lutra lutra) in north-east 
Scotland. Journal of Zoology, London 220: 641-651.
Welcomme R.L. 1984. International transfers of inland fish species, pp. 22-40. In: Courtenay 
W.R. & Stauffer J.R., Edits. Distribution, biology, and management of exotic fishes. Bal­
timore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Williams J.E., Johnson J.E., Hendrickson D.A., Contreras-Balderas S., Williams J.D., Navarro-
Mendoza M., Mcallister D.E. & Deacon J.E. 1989. Fishes of North America – endan­
gered, threatened, or of special concern. Fisheries 14: 2-20.
Wise M.H. 1980. The use of fish vertebrae in scats for estimating prey size of otters and mink. 
Journal of Zoology, London 195: 181-213.
Wolfram-Wais A., Wolfram G., Auer B., Mikschi E. & Hain A. 1999. Feeding habits of two 
introduced fish species (Lepomis gibbosus, Pseudorasbora parva) in Neusiedler See (Aus­
tria), with special reference to chironomid larvae (Diptera: Chironomidae). Hydrobio­
logia 408/409: 123-129.
Zapata S.C. & Granado-Lorencio C. 1993. Age, growth and feeding of the exotic species 
Lepomis gibbosus in a Spanish cooling reservoir. Archiv für Hydrobiologie (Suppl.) 127: 
561-573.
Zerunian S. 1984a. Il problema sistematico dei Rutilus italiani (Pisces Cyprinidae). Bollettino 
del Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Verona 11: 217-236.
Zerunian S. 1984b. I pesci del Fiume Amaseno e dei corsi d’acqua della Pianura Pontina 
(Lazio). Quaderni dell’Istituto di Idrobiologia e Acquacoltura Brunelli 4: 26-67.
