--- 
source: 2007-1.pdf
--- 

Ecological Effects of Roads and Traffic: A Literature Review
Ian F. Spellerberg
Global Ecology and Biogeography Letters, Vol. 7, No. 5. (Sep., 1998), pp. 317-333.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0960-7447%28199809%297%3A5%3C317%3AEEORAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-S
Global Ecology and Biogeography Letters is currently published by Blackwell Publishing.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/black.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is an independent not-for-profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals. For
more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Tue Jun 12 21:47:23 2007


Glob01 Ecology and Biogeography Letters ( 1998) 7, 3 17-333 
Ecological effects of roads and traffic: a literature review 
I A N  F. S P E L L E R B E R G  Envii.onr?zer7tul Mcrr7crgerlzei?t iii?il Desigiz Divisior~, FO. Bou 56, Lii?coli? Ui?ivei'sit~: 
Cni?terbuiy;~ l i e ~ v
Zeulcrr7d e-mcril: Spellei'i@Liizcolir oc.nz 
Abstract. This survey of the literature 011 the 
ecological effects of roads and traffic revealed many 
articles published over many years in peer reviewed 
journals. There has also been a growing number of 
reports on the ecological effects of roads produced by 
government authorities. Whereas few reports have been 
published on assessing the ecological impacts, there 
has been a rapidly growing number of reports on 
methods for mitigation. Gaps in research include the 
I N T R O D U C T I O N  
In the U.S.A.. U.K., the Netherlands, Australia and 
New Zealand. there has been growing concern about 
the ecological effects (or ecological risks) of roads and 
traffic. The general ecological effects of roads and traffic 
on biota are summarized in Table 1. (The ternls biota 
and wildlife are both used; for the purposes of this 
paper these terms have similar lneanings except that 
wildlife would exclude domesticated plants and 
animals.) Pronlpted by the apparent increase in 
publications in this area. the New Zealand Department 
of Conservation (DOC) awarded a contract to the 
author for a survey of the literature (contract No. 
2165). The main objectives were to survey the literature 
on the ecological effects of roads and trafic on the 
natural environment. habitats and species in protected 
areas and to identify the literature dealing with 
environmental assessnlent and ways of mitigating 
impacts from roads and traffic (Spellerberg & Morrison, 
1998). 
This paper is extracted from the DOC report. The 
main aim here is to provide exalnples of the range of 
literature and extent of work on various topics dealing 
with the effects of roads on organisms, habitats and 
landscapes. Exanlples of literature on the assessment 
of risks and impacts, as well as mitigation, are also 
included. The references cited in this paper are now 
0 1998 Blackurell Sc~ence Ltd 
effects of heavy metal accumulation and the processes 
and effects resulting from habitat fragmentation. There 
is a need to assess the effectiveness of underpasses and 
tunnels and the nature and functioning of buffer zones. 
A literature database has been assembled and is being 
updated. 
Key words. Roads, highways, motorways. traffic. 
ecological effects and risks, barrier. pollution. 
included in a literature database nlaintained by the 
author. There are currently 388 references in this 
database. 
METHODS A N D  MATERIALS 
The work concentrated mostly on reports of original 
investigations rather than reviews (apart froln the 
following: Leedy (1978). Watkins (1981). Gilbert 
(1989). Andrews (1990). Aanen et crl. (1991), Bennett 
(1991), Atkinson & Cairns (1992). Schonewald-Cox 
& Buechner (1992). Ramsay (1994), Ednlunds (1995) 
Forman (1995). Noss (1995), Southerland (1995). and 
Environmental Resources Management (1996)). The 
conclusions in this paper are generalizations based 
on the author's interpretation of those original 
reports. This literature report deals mainly with 
literature in English. Most of the references were 
found by searching journals and databases such as 
OPAC. INNZ-New 
Zealand, SSCI, CAB Abstracts, 
Current 
Contents, 
New 
Zealand 
Science 
and 
Technology. Agricola and Spectrum. A home page 
was put on the Worldwide Web and advertisements 
were placed in journals and bulletins (The New 
Zealand Ecological Society Newsletter. The British 
Ecological Society Bulletin, The Biologist, Journal 
of Institute of Biology). 
317 


3 18 
Ian F: Spellerberg 
Table I. A summary of ecological effects of roads 
Effects during construction 
There is a direct loss of habitat and biota.  
There are effects resulting from the infrastructure and supporting activities for construction.  
The iinpacts may occur beyond the immediate vicinity of the road: for example changes In the hydrology. Mining for  
aggregates for the road may take place in a different area. It is important therefore to agree on the geographical boundary  
for an iinpact assessment.  
Short term effects (of a new road) 
The near linear surface creates a nen nnci-oclimate and a change in other physical cond~tions extends varylng distances from  
the road edge.  
The newly created edge provides habitat for edge specles.  
Plant inortality increases along the edge: and such mortalities may extend from the road edge for varying distances.  
The inortality of plants has direct and secondary effects on other organisms.  
Some fauna ~ ~ 1 1 1  
move from the area of the road as a result of habitat loss and physical disturbance.  
Animals are killed by traffic.  
Long term effects 
Animals continue to be killed by traffic.  
The road kills have secondary effects as carrion.  
The loss of hab~tat and change in habltat extends beyond the edge of the road.  
The changes In the b~olog~cal 
may extend for varying d~stances from the road edge.  
coinmun~t~es 
There IS fragmentation of habitat and thls In turn has implications for habitat damage and loss. for dlspersal and vagility of  
organisms. and for sola at ion of populations.  
The edge habltat (or ecotone) and traffic on the road may facilitate dlspersal for soine taxa. including pest specles.  
The d~spersal of pest specles via ecotones or traffic may have secondary effects on biological coininui~it~es.  
Associated structures such as bridges and tui~i~els  
may provlde habltats for soine taxa. 
The run-off from the roads affects aquatic communities. 
Emlss~ons. 11tter. noise and other physical disturbances may extend Into the roadside vegetation for vary~ng d~stances and 
result in changes in specles composition 
The survey revealed some literature databases and 
overviews. notably fro111 the U.S.A., the U.K. and 
the Netherlands. These databases are in both 
electronic for111 and printed form and are continuously 
being updated (they are not publications). 
Literature databases 
(i) Transportation Research Board Publications U.S.A. 
This is a bibliography with abstracts on the ecological 
and environmental effects of highways (kindly provided 
by Barbara Post, TRB Library, U.S.A.). 
(ii) ROAD-RIP Roads Bibliographic database 
This has been compiled by the Wildlallds Centre for 
Preventing Roads (CPR). Based in the U.S.A., it 
includes many hundreds of citations (kindly provided 
by Bethanie Walder at Wildlands CPR, P.O. Box 7516. 
Missoula, MT 59807. U.S.A.). 
Some of the ROAD-RIP database citations were 
State orientated and many were pollution orientated, 
Examples include the following (numbers in brackets 
were the number of citations under that heading): 
Indiana (12), Illinois (33), Mld-west (4), Ohio (21). 
storm run-off (94), changing hydrology (16), glacial 
streams (8), bank erosion (19), toxins (97) emissions 
(55), groulld (lo), hydrocarbons (33), lead (134). air 
(180), water (131). metals (13) noise (19). urban (85) 
and pollution control (178). 
Reviews and reports 
Reviews on the ecology of roads and traffic include 
the following: Leedy (1978), Watkins (1981). Gilbert 
(1989). Andrews (1990) Bennett (1991), Atkinson & 
Cairns (1992). Schonewald-Cox & Buechner (1992), 
Ralnsay (1994), Forman (1995), Noss (1995) and 
Southerland (1995). 
Reports (not necessarily with bibliographies) with 
reviews about the effects of roads on nature (some with 
information on mitigation) have been published in 
several countries. In the Netherlands, in particular, 
there 
are 
Goverlllnellt 
sponsored 
promotiollal 
0 1998 Blackwell Sclence Ltd, Giuhiil Ecoiugl. iind Biogrogriiphy Letters. 7 .  317-333 


publications about ecological effects of roads and also 
well publicised methods for attelnpting to deal with 
habitat fragmentation. Not all reviews seemed to be 
objective. Some considered that roads are 'bad' and 
proceeded to review the literature in that light. 
The following are examples of reports. 
(i) Nufuve engineeiirlg nr7d civil engineeiirlg ~voilis. 
Pudoc. Wageningen (Aanen et nl.. 1991). This is a 
collection of papers on the relation between nature and 
civil engineering works, including many examples of 
mitigation methods. 
(ii) Hecrd on Collisior? 1995: The TVildIife nizd Rouds 
Repoif (Edmunds 1995). In this report prepared by 
Janet Edmunds for the Cheshire. Cumbria and 
Lancashire Wildlife Trusts, the threats to important 
wildlife sites from road developments in the U.K. were 
reviewed. The road developments mentioned in the 
report were in Cumbria, Lancashire, Merseyside. 
Greater Manchester and Cheshire. 
(iii) The signzficcrr7ce of secondcrij, effecfs,fionz vonils oizd 
rood tv~izspovt oiz i7ut~~i.e 
coizservutio17 (E11vironmental 
Resources Management. 1996). This was published as 
the English Nature Research Report No. 178 (English 
Nature. Peterborough). This report presented the 
findings of a research contract. The information was 
obtained from a variety of sources including the 
following: organizations with interests in nature 
conservation and roads; literature searches through the 
British Library; and representatives of English Nature. 
The report included a particularly comprehensive list 
of references (about 210). 
R E S U L T S  A N D  D I S C U S S I O N  
Topics considered only briefly 
The review of the literature was comprehensive but 
not all topics have been included in this paper for 
reasons of brevity. The following topics are considered 
only briefly. 
(i) Environmental costs of roads 
There is a growing interest in the environmental costs 
of roads; see for example Maddison ef nl. (1996). 
(ii)Ecological efects of secondary activities 
Literature on the ecological effects arising from 
secondary activities such as the mining of aggregates 
for road building, transportation of materials for road 
Ecolopical effects o f  roods 
3 1 9 
maintenance 
and the use 
of 
fossil 
fuels for 
transportation has not been included. 
(iii)Interactions between biota and roads 
Whereas this paper considers the literature 
011 
ecological effects of roads 011 biota and ecosystems. 
there are effects of nature on roads, traffic and products 
of traffic. For example, trees may prevent land slips 
on to roads (Haigh et ol., 1995). Trees and other plant 
life forms acculnulate heavy lnetals (Ward, Brooks & 
Reeves. 1974) and may help to reduce the amount of 
airborne 
pollutants. 
especially 
in 
urban 
areas 
(Dochinger, 1980: Greszta, 1982). 
(iv) Impacts of traffic and tourism in new areas 
facilitated by new roads 
The environmental impacts arising from developlnents 
in tourism may have ecological implications. Similarly, 
there may be ecological effects arising from the impacts 
of off-road vehicles. Examples of the literature on 
these topics include Belsky (1987), Kearsley (1990) and 
Forbes (1992). 
(vj Efects of roads on the physical environment 
There are Inany reports about the effects of roads on 
the physical environment. The effects on geology, water 
run-off, pollution and sediment load in streams have 
been well documented e.g. Watkins (1981), Ball. Jenks 
& Aubourg (1998). 
(vi) Structures associated with roads 
There are many developments and structural elements 
associated with roads. e.g. rest areas. signs, electricity 
poles and wires. fences, retaining walls. contiguous 
piles, bridges. viaducts and tunnels. The implications 
of these developlnents and structures for wildlife and 
their use by plants and animals is not discussed here. 
(vii) De-icing agents 
Many surveys and much experimental work has been 
undertaken on the effects of de-icing agents since at 
least the 1960s (e.g. Westing. 1969: Davison. 1971). 
(viiij Geological conservation 
Concern about the effects of roads on the natural 
environment include the implications for geological 
O 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd, Global Ecoiogj. ~ n n '  
Biogeogruphj, Lerreu. 7, 317-333 


conservation. For example, Larwood & Markham 
(1995) discuss the best practical and technical solutions 
available 
for 
geological 
and 
geomorpl~ological 
conservation in relation to road construction. 
Main topics considered 
In the review of topics that follows, it is recognized 
that not all topics are confined to the effects of roads. 
For example, powerline swathes may constitute wildlife 
habitats or barriers; lighting is not confined to roads; 
and habitat fragmentation is caused by many kinds of 
developments. 
Pollution and disturbance effects on biota and 
ecosystems 
Pollutants impacting on biota include noise, light, sand, 
dust and other particulates, metals such as Pb, Cd, Ni 
and Zn, and gases such as CO and NO,. There is a 
wide range of pollutants in water run-off from roads 
(see Gjessing et cil. (1984) for a good overview) and this 
range seenls to have resulted in less than comprehensive 
studies for some specific pollutants. The extent to which 
enlissions and disturbances extend from a road have 
been researched by some authors (see Schonewald-Cox 
& Buechner (1992) for a review). For example, above 
normal traces of heavy nletals have been recorded in 
plants up to 150 m from roads. 
There are both secondary effects and synergistic 
effects, some of which nlay be complex in their 
operation. For example, road pollutants may cause 
physiological stress in some plants and make them 
more susceptible to pest attack, as has been shown 
by work on aphid infestations of roadside trees in 
Switzerland (Braun & Fluckiger. 1984). 
I11 one review of toxic substances in flowing water, 
Hellawell (1988) described the wide range of potential 
pollutants and noted that very few generalizations can 
be made about their effects on biota. Different species 
of plants and animals tend to respond to different 
pollutants in different ways. and even different stages 
in the life history may have very different responses. 
(i) Noise and artificial lighting 
Noise and artificial lighting have been shown to affect 
sonle wildlife. For exanlple Reijnen, Veenbass & Baker 
(1995a), and Reijnen et crl. (1995b) have researched the 
effects of car traffic on breeding bird populations in the 
Netherlands. They found reductions in bird population 
densities and argued that noise load is probably the 
nlost inlportant cause of the reduced densities. Reijnen 
& Foppen (1994) reported that nlale willow warblers 
Plfj~lloscopus trochilus close to highways experienced 
difficulties in attracting or keeping a mate. It was 
suggested that the distortion of the song by traffic noise 
might be a possible cause. 
The effects of road lighting and traffic light on species 
of animals and plants has attracted much attention and 
has been reviewed in a few reports e.g. Environmental 
Resources Management (1996). The effects are wide 
ranging, e.g. for sonle bird species, artificial road 
lighting may contribute to extended feeding tinles (Hill, 
1992) and for some crop plants road sodiuln vapour 
lamps may affect their growth (Sinnadurai, 1981). 
(ii) Dust and sand 
There appear to be few studies of the chemical and 
physical effects of road dust on nature: some of these 
relate to specific regions or biomes such as the Tundra 
and Taiga (see for example the work of Forbes (1995) 
in Siberia and also the review by Walker & Everett 
(1987) of inlpacts in arctic regions). Physical effects 
on plants nlay include cell destruction and blocked 
stomata. A review by Farmer (1993) on the effects of 
dust on plants and plant communities includes 
literature on the effects of different dust types on crops, 
grasslands, heathlands, trees, arctic bryophyte and 
lichen communities. Dust may affect photosynthesis. 
respiration and transpiration, and facilitate effects of 
gaseous pollutants. Farnler found that epiphytic 
lichens. sphagnuln and other mosses were the most 
sensitive of those taxa studied. 
(iii) Heavy metals (trace metals) 
Land-use can influence the types and levels of trace 
metals in road dust. For example. Wong, Cheung & 
Wong (1984) studied the effects of roadside dust on 
seed germination and root growth in vegetable crops 
in China. They found enhanced root growth for plant 
material collected from areas where there was low 
traffic density. For plant nlaterial collected from a high 
traffic density site there was marked reduction of root 
growth. Amongst invertebrates, the effects may or may 
not be detrimental. For example, Przybylski (1979) 
working in agricultural and horticultural areas of 
Poland 
found 
that 
whereas 
combustion 
gases 
(containing lead compounds) may reduce species 
richness in sonle arthropod groups, other groups such 
O 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd, Globcii Ecoiogj' ciiin' Biogeogriipl~y Letters, 7, 317-333 


as members of the Family Aphididae and solne 
Heteroptera flourished. Muskett & Jones (1980) 
working by roads in west London measured heavy 
lnetal concelltrations and found that their data did not 
reveal an obvious decline in either numbers of terrestrial 
invertebrate macrofaulla (caught in pitfall traps at 
various distances from the road) or in species diversity 
('alpha' species diversity index) with increasing lnetal 
pollution load. 
Some reports draw attention to the limited research 
on the effects of animals feeding on biota near roads. 
There has been concern about bio-accumulation of 
metals from one trophic level to another (e.g. Scanlon 
(1987), working in Virginia, U.S.A.). There have also 
been warnings about possible effects on humans who 
may consulne roadside plants and fruits (e.g. see the 
report from Rodriguez-Flores & Rodriguez-Castellon 
(1982) on roads in Puerto Rico). 
(iv) Gases 
The direct effects of road trafic gases (SO?. CO?, CO, 
NO, and Hydrocarbons) on biota other than humans 
have been researched. Effects on plant growth have 
been observed; e.g. Sarkar, Banerjee & Mukherji (1986) 
recorded stunted growth in plants near highways in 
Calcutta. Kammerbauer et nl. (1986) noted a lack of 
experimelltal work on the effects of exhaust emissions 
on forest trees (noting much controversy about reasons 
for die-back in forest trees near roads). They found 
evidence for injuries of Norway Spruce by CO and 
NO,). They also reported reductions in these effects 
when catalytic converters are used. I11 the north of 
England, Spencer & Port (1988) found that Lolit~rlz 
pererlne L. grows more vigorously in soil taken froln 
near roads and that NO, and de-icing salt are possible 
causes. In Angold's (1997) detailed study of the 
ecological effects of road pollutants on heathland 
communities in southern England, it was found that 
llitrogen (nitrogen oxides from traffic) caused increase 
growth in plant species (effects were measured up to 
200 m into the heathland) and consequently the species 
colnpositioll changed. 
(v) Effects on aquatic systems and biota 
Effects of roads and run-off on aquatic biota and 
aquatic ecosystems have attracted much attention. The 
role of wetlands as sinks for metals and macronutrients 
from roads has also been much researched (e.g. Yousef, 
Baker & Hvitved-Jacobsen. 1996). This is an area of 
Ecological efects of roads 
32 1 
possible conflict; on one hand there are attempts to 
avoid pollution of wetlands and on the other hand 
there are wetlands being used as pollution sinks. 
A particularly detailed study on the effects of 
motorway run-off on freshwater ecosystems has been 
undertaken by Maltby et nl. (1995). They researched 
seven streams receiving drainage fro111 the M1 
Motorway in England and reported effects on species 
diversity and in species compositioll of macro-
invertebrate assemblages but found no changes on 
either diversity or abundance of epilithic algae. 
Other effects of roads on biota and habitats 
Examples of reports on the effects of roads and trafic 
are given in Table 2. Southerland (1995) has noted the 
incremental effects of road developlnents and argued 
that roads result in loss of biological diversity. The 
effects of roads on biota and habitats are often 
described as being either negative or positive. For 
example, road kills are seen as negative and an increase 
in edge habitat is seen as positive. Although an increase 
in edge habitat is sometimes claimed as being positive, 
the effects on the wider biotic commullity may not 
have been researched. This dichotomy is simplistic 
because it does not analyse the effects in the wider 
context of community ecology. For example, although 
there are many reports in the literature on road kills. 
the longer term effects on the populatioll dynamics of 
the species concerned may not have been researched. 
In general. road kills do not seen1 to have detrimental 
effects on animal populatiolls except in those cases of 
species with small or diminishing populations. Bennett 
(1991) has written a review on wildlife road mortality. 
The secondary effect on other species seems not well 
researched. One example of a secolldary effect was the 
transportatioll of fungal spores along roads which lnay 
have facilitated the spread of a pathogenic fungus in 
forests in southern Australia (Weste, 1977). 
(I) Habitat fragmentation by roads 
Habitat fraglnelltation (sometimes referred to as 
lalldscape fragmentation) has become a major focus 
of research in collservatioll biology. This is because it is 
believed by many to have by far the greatest detrilnental 
impact of all impacts on nature (e.g. Wilcox & Murphy 
(1985). Usher (1987) and Robinson & Qui11n (1992) 
Abensperg-Traun et 01. (1996), Marsh & Pearman 
(1997)). Andrews (1990) has written an extensive review 
about roads and habitat fragmentation. An extensive 
O 1998 Blackurell Science Ltd. Giobui Ecologj. ond Biogeogrcii,hj, Letters. 7. 317-333 


Table 2. Exan~ples of the literature reporting effects of roads and traffic on wildlife (the categories are not mutually 
exclusive). 
Loss of habitat and changes in biotic communities 
Angold (1997) Impacts of roads on adjacent heathlands. 
Reijnen & Foppen (1994) Birds, Phy!!usco~~irs trociiilirs (L.), Netherlands. 
Sherburne (1985) Effects on several specles of blrds and mammals. Northern Maine, U.S.A. 
Linear habitats 
Adams & Geis (1983) Sinall mammals. U.S.A. 
Reijnen & Foppen (1994) Birds, Netherlands. 
Warner (1992) Effects on birds, Illinois. 
Lamont et 02. (1994) Effects on the plant, Bo~iktiii iiuolierhtzei Meissner, Australia 
Munguira & Thoinas (1992) Butterflies. U.K. 
Affecting behaviour (including dispersal) of mammals 
Adams & Geis (1983) Sinall mammals. U.S.A. 
Bakowski & Kozakiewicz (1988) Small mammals. Poland. 
Brody & Pelton (1989) Bears. North Carolina. 
Burnett (1992) Small mammals. Australia. 
Garland & Bradley (1984) Desert rodents, Mojave Desert. Nevada 
Korn (1991) Small mammals, Germany. 
Mader (1984) Wood mice. Germany. 
Merriam rt rii. (1989) Mice, Ottawa 
Murphy & Curatolo (1987) Caribou, Canada. 
Murphy & Dowding (1994) Stoats, New Zealand beech forest. 
Oxley, Fenton & Casmody (1974) Small mammals. Canada. 
Affecting birds 
Canaday (1996) Several species, Ecuador. 
Clark & Karr (1979) Several species. Illinois. 
Ferris (1979) Several species, Maine. U.S.A. 
Johnson (1990) Bald eagles. Southern Alaska. 
Re~jnen rt 01. (1995a, b) Several species, Netherlands. 
Zande er ri2. (1980) Several species, Netherlands and re-analysis of a previous study 
Affecting biota other than birds and mammals 
Baur & Baur (1990) Snails (Arici~rrn spp.), Canada.  
Mader (1984) Carabid beetles. Germany.  
Mader ri el/. (1990) Arthropods, Germany.  
Majer & Beeston (1996) Alpha diversity of ants and coinparisoi~ of effects of roads with effects of other land uses in Western  
Australia.  
Vos & Chardon (1998) Moor frogs (R/iii/inrvciii~ Nilsson), Netherlands.  
Mortalities 
Adanls & Geis (1983) Small mammals, U.S.A. 
Bennett (1991) Good revieiv for all tasa. 
Bernardino & Dalrymple (1992) Snakes. Florida. 
Case (1978) Various aninlal tasa, Nebraska. 
Dhindsa et 01. (1988) Birds. India. 
Dowler & Swanson (1982) Cedar waswings (Bo~iibj~ri!!~~ 
ceilroru~n Vieillot) Tesas  
Fahrlg et ell. (1995) Amphibians. Ottawa. Canada.  
Illner (1992a) Grey partridge (Perilis peizli.~ L.). Gernlany.  
Illner (1992b) Owls. Germany.  
Madsen (1996) Otters (L~itr/i Iuri/i L.), Denmark.  
Morrls & Morris (1988) Hedgehogs. Neiv Zealand.  
Romin & Bissonette (1996) Deer. U.S.A.  
Vestjens (1973) Various tasa, New South Wales.  
0 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd. Glohrtl Ecolog~ nnil Biogrogrcii,I?y Letters. 7. 317-333 


sumnlary of some major 
effects of landscape 
fragnlentation 
on sensitive 
species 
or systems, 
particularly as determined by roads within parks, has 
been provided by Schonewald-Cox & Buechner (1992). 
The implications for conservation arising from 
habitat fragmentation have resulted in nlany hundreds 
of papers about the supposed importance of island 
biogeography to nature reserve design. The usefulness 
of 
island 
biogeographical 
studies 
to 
nature 
conservation on mainlands is questionable (Spellerberg, 
1991). There are many ways of quantifying habitat 
fragmentation, e.g. in addition to calculations of the 
rate of reduction of total habitat area and increase in 
the number of fragments, sonle studies on habitat 
fragmentation have measured the extent of isolation 
of habitats, area of edge (and edge related indices), 
shape of fragments, and degree of spatial heterogeneity. 
The research on forest edges has also pronlpted 
discussion about nlethods of analysis, e.g. Salisbury 
(1996). 
(ii) Edge efects and microclimates in forests 
In a study in the Rocky Mountains, Reed, Johnson- 
Barnard & Baker (1996) assessed the extent of forest 
fragmentation caused by roads and by clearcut forestry. 
They found that roads did contribute to forest 
fragmentation and that roads contributed more to 
fragmentat~on than did clearcuts. Furthermore, the 
edge habitat created by roads was 1.561.98 times the 
extent of edge habitat created by clearcuts. 
In a study of woodlands in Ohio, Kupfer (1996) 
looked at patterns and determinants of edge vegetation 
and concluded that microclimate influences edge 
succession. Williams-Linera (1990) working on forest 
edges in tropical pre-montane wet forests of Panama 
found changes in microclimate penetrating 15 m into 
the forests. Young & Mitchell (1994) researched the 
microclimate and vegetation edge effects of forest 
margins created 100-130 years ago. Their research was 
in fragmented podocarp-broadleaf forest in the North 
Island of New Zealand. Penetration of microclimatic 
edge effects was approximately 50111, regardless of 
forest size. They suggested that microclinlatic edge 
effects on processes such as germination and early 
establishment are a major feature of forest dynamics. 
(iiij Effects of fragmentation on forest birds 
Rich, Dobkin & Niles (1994) considered that extensive 
fragmentation of what was formerly contiguous forest 
Ecological effects of roads 
323 
in eastern North America is a prinlary cause of decline 
in forest bird species. In their own study, they reported 
that even narrow forest-dividing corridors affect the 
distribution and abundance of birds. 
(ivj Efects on small mammals 
In Kansas, small road clearances less than 3 m wide 
were shown to affect small mammals such as voles and 
rats (Swihart & Slade, 1984). In Australia, Mansergh 
& Scotts (1989) showed that the social organization 
and survival rates of the mountain pigmy-possum 
(B~ii.i.ur71,vsYUI.I'LIS Broom) are disrupted because the 
habitat has become fragmented by roads (and other 
developments within a ski resort). 
(vj Consequences for feral predators 
Fragnlentation of habitats may have implications for 
dispersal of feral predators but l~ttle research seenls to 
have been done in this area (May & Norton, 1996). 
(vij Roads, fragmentation and invasive plant species 
As well as contributing to habitat fragmentation, roads 
and road traffic facilitate the dispersal of plant species. 
There has been concern expressed about the spread of 
alien and invasive species, particularly with regard to 
invasions of nature reserves. For example, Brothers & 
Spingarn (1992) working in Central Indiana, U.S.A., 
drew attention to the possibility of forest fragmentation 
encouraging alien invasions for at least two reasons. 
First, fragnlentation increases the ratio of non-forest 
to forest and of forest edge to interior habitats. Second, 
environmental changes at forest edges may provide 
points of entry for alien species. In New Zealand, 
Tinlnlins &Williams (1990) have noted that among the 
important factors influencing the number of problem 
weeds in reserves are distance from roads and railway 
lines. 
(viij Roads and roadside verges as linear habitats and 
wildlife corridors 
The total area of roadside verges in sonle countries has 
been carefully documented and much has been made 
of the fact that roads may benefit nature. Birds may 
feed on the grit on roads, power lines provide perches 
for birds and roadside verges may provide habitats for 
some plant and animal species. 
In some countries, there is much interest in roadside 
O 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd. Clohnl Ecolog), iiilrl Biogcog~nph],Letiei,s. 7, 317-333 


324 
Ian E Spellerberg 
verges as linear habitats. In Illinois, for example, 
Warner (1985) studied the movements of free-ranging 
domestic 
cats 
and 
found 
that 
they 
made 
disproportionately high use of farmsteads, roadsides 
and field boundaries. In Indiana, U.S.A., Roach & 
Kirkpatrick (1985) reviewed the wildlife use of roadside 
woody plantings and recommended planting regimes. 
Also in America, Smith (1993) reviewed what are 
called 'Greenways' and gave an overview of .greenway 
ecology' and habitat management. I11 the U.K., there 
has been considerable interest in the contribution of 
roadside verges to conservation (as reviewed by Way, 
1977). A detailed analysis of Cheshire's roadside verges 
has been undertaken (Cheshire Ecological Services, 
1995). That report details survey methods, analyses 
roadside verge habitats and makes 1:ecommendations 
for management and monitoring. Examples of the 
literature on roadside verges are given in Table 3. 
There has been a growing interest in the possible 
corridor function of roadside verges and the term 
wildlife corridor is widely mis-used. Whereas many 
linear landscape features such as roadside verges may 
provide linear habitats, there is only a small amount 
of evidence to show that roadside verges are used 
by animals as conduits for dispersal (Spellerberg & 
Gaywood, 1993). However, there is now a rapidly 
growing interest in this topic, especially in Australia 
(Saunders & Hobbs, 1991; Saunders, Hobbs & Ehrlich 
1993). 
(viiij Traffic and dispersal of plant species 
Dispersal of plant species via road traffic has been 
addressed in some surveys and an excellent analysis of 
the mechanism is given in Wace (1977). Dispersal of 
potential weeds and alien flora via traffic (and by 
vehicles and humans during road construction) has 
received attention in the U.S.A., Australia and New 
Zealand. Tinlmins & Williams (1990) looked at the 
accidental spread of weeds through reserves and have 
noted that reduction in roads could address this 
problem. The role of roads and traffic in the spread of 
weeds in Australia has been addressed by Amor & 
Stevens (19751, Cowie & Werner (1993) and Lonsdale 
&Lane (1994). Rather than trying to attempt to prevent 
this form of seed movement via tourist traffic, it was 
suggested by Lonsdale & Lane (1994) that resources 
are best spent on detecting and eradicating weed 
infestations. The conclusion is based on the acceptance 
that the road has been built and is operational. 
The ecology of dispersal of alien species and the 
ecology of invasions has become a huge research area. 
In Britain, Usher's (1988) review on biological 
invasions noted that tourism poses dangers for reserves 
since there is a positive correlation between visitation 
rate and the number of introduced species (Macdonald 
& Frame, 1988; Macdonald et trl., 1989). 
Assessing the risks and the impacts 
There are many exanlples of Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIAs) which deal with road projects in 
different environments. International organizations 
such as the IUCN (IUCN, 1996) have outlined the 
assessment of environmental impacts of new roads. 
The theory of EIA with regards to roads has been 
explored in F A 0  (1989). In the U.K., Hodgen & Ford 
(1985) described the planning and design of roads for 
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). For 
the State of Washington, Horner & Mar (1983) gave 
a protocol for assessing the impacts of road operations 
on 
aquatic 
ecosystems. 
The 
protocol 
offers 
opportunities to forecast potential aquatic impacts at 
an early stage of development. I11 the U.K., the 
Department of Transport (U.K.) (1992) has published 
a review on 'Assessing the environmental impact of 
road schemes' which includes effects on wildlife. 
In the U.S.A., the National Environmental Policy 
Act (NEPA) provides a framework for environmental 
impact assessments and a basis for assessing the effects 
of road projects. A recent example of an environnlental 
impact assessment of a proposed road and one which 
addresses many fornls of wildlife is the Environnlental 
Impact Statement for the Beaver Basin Rim Road 
(U.S. Department of the Interior, 1996). The US 
Department of Transportation has reviewed impact 
assessments and mitigation with respect to highways 
and ecology (Erickson, Camagis & Robbins, 1978). 
Atkinson & Cairns (1992) have also reviewed the 
ecological risks of highways in the U.S.A. These reports 
are two of a few which draw attention to the growing 
risks associated with the transport of hazardous 
materials. 
Some EIA methodology is designed to help identify 
primary, secondary and tertiary impacts of roads, e.g. 
Lelievre & Serodes (1995) have suggested a cause-effect 
network with three components to assist in identifying 
secondary and tertiary impacts. The three components 
are: actions undertaken, environmental cl~aracteristics 
and the stages of the project. 
Ecological considerations have been included within 
EIAs for some roads. For example, Box & Forbes 
O 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd, Globcil Ecologj~ iiiid Bi~ge(lg~'il./~/lj: 
Letters, 7. 317-333 


Ecological effects of roads 
325 
Table 3. Examples of I~terature about roads and roadside verges (as linear habitats) and roads as wildlife corridors 
(facilitating dispersal) for wildlife. 
Road \'erge as habitat 
Adams (1984) Small mammals. North Carolina, U.S.A.  
Cow~e& Werner (1993) Alien plant specles, northern Australia.  
Hallsen & Jensen (1972) Plant communities. Denmark.  
Havlln (1987) Birds. Czech Republic.  
Lane (1976) Plants, Australla.  
Mlchael (1986) Songbirds. West Virginia, U.S.A.  
Mungulra & Thomas (1992) Butterflies, U.K.  
Newbey & Newbey (1987) Birds. Western Australla.  
Reznicek (1980) Halophytes, Michigan. U.S.A.  
Roach & Kirkpatrick (1985) Wildlife, Indiana, U.S.A.  
Samways (1989) Bush crickets, Southern France.  
Tyser & Worley (1992) Alien flora. Montana. U.S.A.  
Wester & Juvik (1983) Plant communities. Hawaii.  
Wells rt ill. (1996) Reptiles. U.K.  
Wilson et 01. (1992) Plant communit~es, Neiv Zealand.  
Road verge tnatiagetnent 
Laursen (1981) Mowing frequency and birds, Denmark.  
Munguira & Thomas (1992) Butterflies. U.K.  
Parr & Way (1988) Long-term effects of mowing. U.K.  
Pedevillano & Wright (1987) Visitor management and mountain goats. Montana. U.S.A.  
Roach & Kirkpatrick (1985) Wildlife. Indiana. U.S.A.  
Sangwlne (1992) Landscape planting. U.K.  
Thompson. Rutter & Ridout (1986) British natlve plants tolerant of salinity (U.K.)  
Watson. Rlce & Monnlg (1989) Herbicide (Picloram) for weed control, northern Rockies. U.S.A.  
Dispersal studies ( ~ i a  
traffic and along and from road verges) 
Amor & Stevens (1975) Weeds into forest. Dartmouth, Australia.  
Cllfford (1959) Seed dispersal vla traflic, hTigerla.  
Getz. Cole & Gates (1978) Small mammals, Illinois, U.S.A.  
Lonsdale & Lane (1994) Weed seeds. northern Australia  
Schmidt (1989) Plant dispersal by traffic. Germany.  
Seabrook & Dettmann (1996) Cane toads, N.S.M7, Australia.  
Timillins & Willlams (1990) Weeds in New Zealand forest reserves.  
Travis & Tilsworth (1986) Fish in culverts. Alaska.  
Vermeulen (1994) Ground beetles. Netherlands.  
Wace (1977) Plant species vla cars. Canberra. Australia.  
Warner (1985) Free range domestic cats. Illinois. U.S.A.  
Wilcox (1989) Purple loosetrlfe (Lytli~~un?  
siiiic/i~.r/i L.), Neiv York State, U.S.A 
(1992) suggested a conceptual framework for an 
and one in which there is very detailed theory and clear 
ecological input into road projects. However, ecological 
practical applications. Environmental monitoring and 
impact assessment seen1 far less well researched than 
ecological monitorillg should follow on from EIAs or 
other aspects of EIAs. The Institute of Environmental 
at least be established as part of the EIA process. 
Assessment (IEA, 1995) has produced 'Guidelines Jot. 
However, there seems to be a lack of reports dealing 
baseline ecological clssessn~ent'. In a recent book edited 
with 
post-EIA 
environmental 
monitoring 
and 
by Schnlitt & Osenberg (1996), there are many ideas 
especially with ecological monitoring. 
for detecting ecological inlpacts in coastal habitats. I11 
other publications (Reijnen et cil., 1995a, b), there are 
Redressing the detrimental ecological eftects 
methods for predicting the effects of motorway traffic 
011 breeding bird populations. Reijnen et cil. (1995a) is 
The need to redress ecological effects of roads is clearly 
a particularly extensive book from the Netherlands 
expressed in some general reviews of mitigation and 
O 1998 Blackivell Science Ltd, Globiil Ecology iinil BiogeogrqJh~, 
Letters, 7. 317-333 


enhancement (e.g. Thrasher, 1983). These general 
reviews may have helped to influence the World Bank 
and 
some governments which 
previously 
have 
supported large road projects. For example, in 198 1, the 
World Bank together with the Brazilian Governnlent 
jointly funded the $1.5 billion development in southern 
Brazil with a centrepiece of a 1500 km sealed highway. 
This highway has been at the centre of a campaign to 
reform international financial support for such projects 
(Reid & Bowles, 1997). Some years on the World 
Bank has published a manual in which the 'negative' 
environnlental impacts of roads and traffic are 
addressed (World Bank, in press). In the U.S.A., Baker 
(1998) reports that decades of road construction in the 
national forests may soon be at an end as a result of 
the U.S. Forest Service's roads programme. A one year 
moratorium on new roads in pristine areas, with the 
exception of some localities in Alaska and the Pacific 
Northwest, has been proposed. In the U.K., a design 
manual for roads and bridges has been published 
in which there are extensive sections on mitigation 
(Department of Transport, 1993). Work from the 
Netherlands and from Dcnmark includes development 
of policy (Bohemen, 1995) and advice for the wider 
community with respect to dealing with effects of roads 
on wildlife. Some of these publications include detailed 
methods for addressing the ecological effects of roads 
(e.g. Bekker et ul., 1995). The concept of ecological 
compensation is now Dutch Governmental policy 
(Cuperus, Canters & Piepers, 1996). In Australia, the 
Queensland Department of Main Roads (1997) has 
produced a comprehensive manual about the design, 
construction, and management of roads in the wet 
tropics. The mission statement for this manual includes 
the following: 'To prol'ide sqfe, equituble trnd econon~ic 
rontls ~vitizin the Ivet tropic region ~vlzilst presenting, 
consei.i~ing u~zti relztrbilitnting the unique nilturtrl and 
cultnrnl ~'trlues to tlze greatest extent prilcticnll. In New 
Zealand, the organization Transf~~ndNew Zealand 
(1997) has produced a manual for cost benefit analysis 
of road projects, including ecological features and some 
information on mitigation. 
The literature dealing with ways of redressing 
environmental and ecological effects includes many 
topics (Table 4), although it goes without saying that 
not all are exclusive to roads and traffic. Some authors 
support an ecosystem approach to redressing the effects 
of roads, e.g. Southerland (1995) advocated that an 
ecosystem approach is critical to assessing biodiversity 
effects (at appropriate scales) and that mitigation of 
the loss of biodiversity should extend to the provision 
of adequate buffer areas and habitat corridors. 
Reports about means of mitigating the effects of 
pollution seem to be directed mainly at contamination 
of wetlands (e.g. Kober & Kehler, 1987) and problems 
of containing surface run-off from roads. By way of 
contrast, there has been research on the use of wetlands 
as a sink for urban water run-off (e.g. Reuter, Djohan 
& Goldman, 1992). 
There is much literature on tunnels and overpasses; 
mainly on how to construct them. There seems little 
on monitoring the effectiveness (in terms of use) and 
effects (in terms of population size, fragmentation of 
populations and gene flow) of these attempts to reduce 
barrier effects. 
Mitigation banking is not new (see Table 4) but is 
becoming 
increasingly 
popular. 
It 
involves 
conlpensation for loss or damage to habitats by 
establishment of wildlife habitats elsewhere (or 
enhancement of habitats). There is much room for 
research here, particularly with regard to the ecological 
restoration techniques. 
Landscaping and planting roadside verges to reduce 
erosion and to provide habitats for wildlife has been 
widely researched (Table 3). The concept of buffer 
zones (undisturbed areas or strips) and filter strips 
(undisturbed except to provide access) has long been 
popular in conservatioll and has been researched with 
respect to roads (Clinnick, 1985). In the U.S.A., 
agencies such as Wallace, McHarg, Roberts and Todd 
(WMRT) have produced structured guidelines for 
buffer zones and corridors (Smith, 1993). The use of 
buffer zones to minimize effects of herbicide spray drift 
has been researched by Marrs et ill. (1992). The use of 
buffer strips to absorb pollutants has been discussed 
by Angold (1997). Her research suggests that some 
dense vegetation may act as sinks for some pollutants. 
The best width for a buffer zone has not been well 
researched except in connection with the prevention of 
sedimentation of streams. Very little research appears to 
have been undertaken on how to identify the optimum 
widths of buffer strips alongside roads. One way of 
approaching this is to research the nature and extent 
of the impacts from roads and traffic on wildlife 
communities. (e.g. Angold, 1997). 
Areas for research 
(ij Pollution 
Whereas there is much research showing rates and 
levels of accumulation of metals in roadside biota, the 
O 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd, Globiil Ecology iind Biogeogi'ci~~iiyLettei'~. 7 ,  317-333 


Ecological effects of roads 
327 
Table 4. Redressing the ecological effects of roads. 
Reducing road mortality and barrier effects of roads, bridges, and railway lines 
Evink (1990) Safe crossings for panthers, Florida, U.S.A.  
Feldhamer et ill. (1986) Roadside fencing and deer. Pennsylvania, U.S.A.  
Hunt et 01. (1987) Tunnels for mammals. Neiv South Wales.  
Langton (ed.) (1989) Tunnels for amphibians, European.  
Madsen (1993) Faunal passages and road systems. Denmark.  
Mansergh & Scotts (1989) Tunnels for pygmy-possums, Biii.iamj:s pnri,lrs, Australia.  
Murphy & Curatolo (1987) Behaviour of caribou where roads run near pipelines. Alaska  
hTieuivenhuizen & Apeldoorn (1995) Mammal use of underpasses. Netherlands.  
Owens &James (1991) Pelicans and bridges. Tesas. U.S.A.  
Reed (1981) Deer and underpasses. Colorado. U.S.A.  
Romin & Bissonette (1996) Deer fences. tunnels and speed controls. U.S.A.  
Salvig (1991) Faunal passages and roads, Denmark.  
Singer, Langlitz & Sailluelson (1985) Underpasses for mountain goats, Montana, U.S.A.  
Verboom (1995) Analytical methods for risks of fauna crossing roads. Netherlands.  
Ward (1982) Fencing and deer, Wyoming. U.S.A.  
Vanes, Velasco & Suarez (1995) Vertebrate movement in cul~erts, Spaln.  
Mitigation banking 
Howarth (1991) Wetlands, North Carolina, U.S.A  
Lister (1992) Salmon habitat, British Columbia.  
Buffer zones and filters 
Angold (1997) Buffer zones and oligotrophic communities, U.K. 
Clinnick (1985) Buffers for protection of streams fro111 sediment, Australia. 
Swift (1986) Filter strips to prevent sedimentation of streams. Appalachian Mountains, U.S.A. 
Trimble & Sartz (1957) Logging roads, sediments and streams. U.S.A. 
effects seem not well researched. As early as 1976, 
material and also the quality of the ecological content 
Smith reviewed lead contamination of roadside 
is varied; many reports leave much to be desired. There 
ecosystems and at that time noted that our 
could be more research on the assessment of ecological 
understanding of the effects on biota is deficient. More 
impacts of road projects. I recomnlend an appraisal of 
recent reports of the late 1980s continue to mention 
the biology and the ecology of EIAs which have been 
that we know little about the chemistry of heavy metal 
conlpleted for road projects. 
uptake in biota. The long-term cumulative effects seem 
poorly researched. Furthermore there has previously 
been some controversy with regard to the effects of 
(ivj Habitat fragmentation 
heavy metal accumulation 011 roadside forest trees 
Many authors consider that fragmentation of habitats 
(Backhaus & Backhaus, 1987). 
by roads may be the most important of the ecological 
effects of roads and their traffic. Ecological studies of 
(iij Long-term efects 
fragmentation are growing in number but there are 
still very few reports which analyse the effects of 
There is very little research on long-term ecological 
fragmentation by roads. There is room for research on 
effects of roads and how to monitor those effects. This 
analytical techniques as well as on modelling the likely 
could be particularly relevant to the ecology of invasive 
effects.
species and dispersal of those species via roads and 
road traffic. 
(vj Methods to reduce barrier efects 
Much has been said about the use of wildlife tunnels 
There are many Environnlental Impact Assessments of 
but there seems to have been little research on their 
road projects but the level and content of the biological 
effectiveness e.g. Hunt, Dickens & Wl~elan(1987), 
O 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd. Glohal Ecolog~ n i ~ dBiogeogrtiph~, Lettris. 7. 3 17-333 


328 
Ion F: Spellerberg 
Langton (1989) and Nieuwenhuizen & Apeldoorn 
(1995). 
(vij Mitigation banking 
This is an area in which little research has been done 
(vii) Bufer zones 
The concept of buffer zones is widely used but, like 
wildlife corridors, the ecological aspects have been 
poorly researched. 
A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S  
I a m  grateful to the Department of Conservation (New 
Zealand) for funding this research. Most of the 
literature search was undertaken by Toni Morrison 
and the project could not have been launched without 
her help. Bruna Jones kindly edited and prepared the 
nlanuscript for publication. 
REFERENCES 
Aanen, P.. Alberts. W.. Bekker, C;.J., van Bohemen. H.D., 
Melman, P.J.M., van der Sluijs, J., Veenbaas. G.. 
Verkaar, H.J. & van de Watering, C.F. (1991) Nntlire 
engineering cincl civil ei~gineeiing 11'0i.k.~. p. 139. Pudoc, 
Wayeninyen, The Netherlands, 
Abensperg-Traun, M., Smith, G.T.. Arnold, G.W. & 
Steven. D.E. (1996) The effects of habitat fragmentation 
and livestock-grazing on animal communities in 
remnants of gimlet Elicnlypili.~ .reiliibris woodland in the 
Western Australian wheatbelt. 1. Arthropods. J. i~pl~l. 
Ecol 33. 1281-1301. 
Adams. L.W. (1984) Small n~a~ulnal 
use of an interstate 
highway median strip. 
i~ppl. Ecol. 21, 175-178. 
Adams. L.W. & Geis, A.D. (1983) Effects of roads on 
small mammals. J. cipi,l. Ecol. 20, 403415. 
Amor. R.L. & Stevens, P.L. (1975) Spread of weeds from 
a roadside into sclerophyll forests at Dartmouth, 
Australia. Weed Res. 16, 111-1 18. 
Andrews, A. (1990) Fragmentation of habitat by roads 
and utility corridors: a review. ALISI.Zoo1 26, 130-141. 
Angold, P.G. (1997) The impact of a road upon adjacent 
heathland 
vegetation: 
effects on 
plant 
species 
composition. J. c~ppl. Ecol. 34, 409417. 
Atkinson, R.B. & Cairns, J. (1992) Ecoloyical risks of 
highways. Ahnncea in inodein ei~viroriinei~tnl 
toxicology: 
predicting eco.~y,rte1?7 
ii,rk, 20, 237-262. 
Backhaus, B. & Backhaus. R. (1987) Distribution of range 
transported lead and cadmium in spruce stands affected 
by forest decline. Sci totcil Environ. 59. 283-290. 
Baker, B. (1998) Rethinking roads in the nation's forests. 
BioScience. 48. 156. 
Bakowski, C. & Kosakiewicz, M. (1988) Effects of a forest 
road on Bank Vole and Yellow-neck populations. Actci 
rheriol. 72, 245-252. 
Ball, J.E., Jenks, R. & Aubourg, D. (1998) An assessment 
of the availability of pollutant constituents on road 
surfaces. Sci. totcil Environ. 209. 243-254. 
Baur, A. & Baur, B. (1990) Are roads barriers to dispersal 
in the land snail Aricintii iirbitstorun~? Cnn. 'Zool. 68, 
613-617. 
Bekker, G.J., van den Hengel, B., van Bohemen. H.D. & 
van der Sluijs, H. (1995) Nc~ture nci.oss ii~oror~t~cij.~, 
p. 103. 
RWS & DWW.. Delft. 
Belskp. A.J. (1987) Revegetation of natural and human- 
caused disturbances in the Serengeti National Park, 
Tanzania. Vegetcitio. 70, 5 1-60. 
Bennett.  A.F. (1991) Roads, roadsides and wildlife 
conservation: a review, i\'nture 
coi~aervniio~~the role 
2: 
of coriidors (ed. by D.A. Saunders and R.J. Hobbs). 
pp. 99-118. Surrey Beatty & Sons Pty Limited, Western 
Australia. 
Bernardino, F.S. & Dalrymple, G.H. (1992) Seasonal 
activity and road mortality of the snakes of the Pa-hay- 
okee wetlands of Everglades National Park, U.S.A. Biol. 
Coiiser~'.62, 71-75. 
Bohemem, H.D. van (1995) Mitiyation and compensation 
of habitat fragmentatioll caused by roads: strategy, 
objectives, and practical measures. Peiii.rpii Rea. Rec. 
1475, 133-137. 
Box, J.D. & Forbes, J.E. (1992) Ecological considerations 
in the environmental assessment of road proposals. 
Higlzn,nys Trnnsp. April, 16-22. 
Braun, S. & Fluckiger. W. (1984) Increased population of 
the aphis Aphis poini at a motorway. Part 2-The 
effect 
of drouyht and deicing salt. En~'iron. Polliit. (Seriea A ) ,  
36, 261-270. 
Brody. A.J. & Pelton, M.R. (1989) Effects of roads on 
Black Bear movements in western North Carolina. Wilcl. 
Soc: Biill. 17. 5-10. 
Brothers, T.S. & Spinyarn. A. (1992) Forest fragmentation 
and alien plant invasioll of central Indiana old-growth 
forests. Con.~err'. Biol. 6, 91-100. 
Burnett, S.E. (1992) Effects of a rainforest road on 
movements of small mammals: mechanisms 
and 
implications. C.S.I.R.0. Wild. Rea. 19, 95-104. 
Canaday, C. (1996) Loss of insectivorous birds along a 
yradient of human inipact in Amazonia. Biol Coil~eric 
77, 63-7 1 
Case, R.M. (1978) Interstate highway road-killed animals: 
a data source for biologists. PVilil. Soc. Bitll. 6, 8-13. 
Cheshire Ecological Services (1995) Cheslliie ronclsicle verge 
.rliive): T'ol. 
I ,  Report rind recoi?zi?leizclf~iiona,p. 34. 
Cheshire Ecological Services, The Cheshire Wildlife 
Trust. 
Clark, W.D. & Karr, J.R. (1979) Effects of highways on 
0 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd, Globul Eroiogj cuiirl Buogeogriipliy Lrttrr.~, 7, 317-333 


Ecological effects of roads 
329 
Red-winged Blackbird and Horned Lark populations. 
wil.i.017 Biill. 91. 143-145. 
Clifford, H.T. (1959) Seed dispersal by motor vehicles. ' 
Ecol. 47, 311-315. 
Clinnick. P.F. (1985) Buffer strip management in forest 
operations: a review. Ali.rt. Foi: 48, 34-45. 
Cowie, I.D. & Werner, PA. (1993) Alien plant species 
invasive in Kakadu National Park, tropical northern 
Australia. Biol Coi~aer\'.63, 127-135. 
Cuperus, R., Canters, K.J. & Piepers, A.A.G. (1996) 
Ecological compensation of the impacts of a road. 
Preli~ninary method for the A50 road link (Eindhoven- 
Oss), The Netherlands. Ecoi Eng. 7, 327-349. 
Davison. A.W. (1971) The effects of de-iciny salt on 
roadside veryes. 1, soil and plant analysis. J iippl. Ecol. 
8, 555-561. 
Department of Transport (U.K.) (1992) Aaaessing tile 
envii~onii?ei7tnl iriipilct qf' ioacl scliei?7e.r, p. 30. Her 
Majesty's Stationery Ofice, London. 
Department of Transport (Scottish Ofice Industry 
Department), 
Welsh 
Office, Department 
of 
the 
Enr,ironment for Northern Ireland (1993) Desigrt maiziciil 
,for roacls find bridges, Voi 10: eil~'iroi~iizental
cle.i.igi~; Vol. 
11: Enviroi1ii?ei7tcil asseaanlent, p. 62. HMSO. 
Dhindsa, M.S.. Sandhu, J.S.. Sandhu, P.S. & Toor, H S. 
(1988) Roadside birds in Punjab (India): relation to 
mortality from vehicles. Ei7i; Conaerv 15, 303-310. 
Dochinger. L.S. (1980) Interception of airbourne particles 
by tree planting. J. Enl'iroii. Qiial. 9, 265-268. 
Dowler, R.C. & Swanson, G.A. (1982) Hiyh lnortality of 
Cedar Waxwings associated with highway plantinys. 
Wilsoi7 B~tll. 94, 602-603. 
Edmunds, J. (1995) Hend oil col1i.rion 1095. Tlireirta to 
iii7j)orioi1t ~t.iliiiife siiea,fi.o1?7 roc~cldevelopiizent in Cwizbrin, 
Lcincii.rltire, 
~Llerseysicle, Greater 
iblai7che.rier crnd 
Ciie.i.iiire, p.40. The Wildlife Trusts, North West 
England. 
Environ~nental Resources Management 
(1996) The 
significance of secondary effects from roads and road 
transport on nature conservation. Englis11 i\'fitlire 
Reaenrck Report 
1\70 
178. p. 91. English Nature, 
Peterborouyh. 
Erickson. P.A., Camagis, G. & Robbins. E.J. (1978) 
High11,nys cinc/ecoiogj.: iiilpfict ilsaeasiizent nndinitigntioil, 
p. 182. 
Prepared 
for 
the 
Federal 
Highway 
Administration 
(FHWA-RWEIOEP-78-2). National 
Technical Information Services, US Department of 
Commerce, Virginia, U.S.A. 
Evink, G.L. (1990) Wildlife crossinys  of Florida 1-75, 
Trnnsp. Re.i.. Rec. 1279, 54-59. 
Fahrig, L., Pedlar, J.H., Pope. S.E., Taylor, P.D. & Wegner, 
J.F. (1995) Effect of road traffic on amphibian density. 
Biol. Coilseric 73, 177-182. 
FA0 (1989) Definition and scope of protective measures 
for roads. 14'21tersi1ed ~Ll(iitnger?~eni 
Field ~Mcri~iiol-Road 
cleaign ilild coi1.riructioi7 in sensitive 1t~aterahec1,r.F A 0  
Conservation 
Guide 
1315. 
pp. 1-12. 
Food 
and 
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations. Rome. 
Farmer, A.M. (1993) The effects of dust on vegetatioll-a 
review. Enviroil. Polllit. 79, 63-75. 
Feldhamer, G.A., Gates. J.E.. Harman, D.M., Loranger, 
A.J. & Dixon. K.R. (1986) Effects of instate fencing  
on White-Tailed Deer activity. J. Wilcll. ~Llgiizi~t, 50,  
497-503.  
Ferris, C.R. (1979) Effects of Interstate 95 on breeding 
birds in northern Maine. J Wildl. 1Vlgi?717t, 43, 421-427. 
Forbes, B.C. (1992) Tundra disturbance studies. 1: long- 
term effects of vehicles on species richness and biomass. 
Environ. Coil.i.erl! 19, 48-58. 
Forbes, B.C. (1995) Tundra disturbance studies, 111: short 
term effects of Aeolian sand and dust. Yamal Region, 
Northwest Siberia. Enviroi7. Coi~aeri; 22, 335-344. 
Forman, R.T.T. (1995) Corridor  attributes, roads, and 
powerlines. Land I?IO.FLI~CS:ecology of' lai7iirci1pes
ille  
ancl regions, pp. 145-176. Cambridye University Press.  
Cambridge.  
Garland Jr., T. &Bradley, W.G. (1984) Effects of a highway 
011 Mojave Desert rodent populations. Ain ~Lliill. Arirt. 
111, 49-56. 
Getz, L.L., Cole, F.R. & Gates. D.L. (1978) Interstate 
roadsides as dispersal routes for iblici~oi~~.i.penn.~~~lvai~ic~ia. 
Ecol 59, 208-213. 
Gilbert. O.L. (1989) Roads. Tlie ecologj. qf iiihiin liabitcit.i., 
pp. 145-164. Chaplnan and Hall Ltd., New York. 
Gjessing. E., Lygren, E., Andersen. S., Berglind, L., 
Carlberg, G., Efraimsen, H., Kallqvist, T. & Martinsen, 
K. (1984) Acute toxicity and chemical characteristics of  
moderately polluted runoff from highways. Sci. ioicil  
Ei7viroii. 33, 225-232.  
Greszta, J. (1982) Accumulation of heavy metals by certain 
tree species. C'i.hai7 ecologpT1ze second Etiiopean 
Ecological Sj.ii?j)o.i.iLlii? Berlin, 8-12 Sepieinber 1980 (ed. 
by R. Bornkamm, J.A. Lee and M.R.D. Seaward), 
pi,. 161-165. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford. 
Haigh, M.J., Rawat, J.S., Rawat, M.S., Bartarya, S.K. & 
Rai, S.P. (1995) Interactions between forest and landslide 
activity along new highways in the Kun~aun Himalaya. 
Foi: Ecol. 1Wgiizi7i. 78, 173-189. 
Hansen, K. & Jensen, J. (1972) The vegetation on roadsides 
on Denmark: a qualitative and quantitative comparison. 
Don.rk hot. Ark. 28, 2. 
Havlin, J. (1987) Motorways and birds. Foliii sool. 36. 
137-153. 
Hellawell. J.M. (1988) Toxic substances in rivers and 
streams. Enviroi7. Pollz~t. 50, 61-85. 
Hill, D. (1992) The iiizpaci of nolye ai7cl nrtificicil liglit on 
~vciterfou,l beliovioiir: n revie~v niid aj.rit1ie.i.i.r of in'ailcihle 
literotzire, p. 32. British Trust for Ornitholoyy, Tring. 
Hodgen, R. &Ford, C.D. (1985) The planning, design and 
construction of a bypass through an area of outstanding 
natural beauty. Proc. lilsi. Civil Engra, 78, 1065-1083. 
Homer, R.R. & Mar, B.W. (1983) Guide for assessing 
water-quality impacts of highway operations and 
maintenance. Ticinapn Res. Rec. 948, 47-55. 
Howarth, L.S. (1991) Highway construction and wetland 
loss: lnitigation banking programs on the southeastern 
0 1998 Blacksell Science Ltd. Clohiil Ecology niid Biogeogri~pl~j 
Letters. 7. 317-313 


330 
Ian E Spellerberg 
United States. 
E11i;ii.o111?7e17/i11
The 
Profes.i.ioi~nI. 13, 
139-144. 
Hunt. A,, Dickens, H.J. & Whelan, R.J. (1987) Movement 
of mammals through tunnels under railway lines. Aliat. 
Zool. 24. 89-93. 
IEA (1995) G~~ideli1ze.rfor hoaeliile ecologicirl os.i.eaaiiieizt, 
p. 140. Institute of Environmental Assessment & E & 
FN Spon, London. 
Illner, H. (1992a) Effect of roads with heavy trafic on 
Grey Partridge (Perclix pezlix) density. Gibier F O L I I I ~  
Srrzn'cige, 9, 467480. 
Illner,  H. (1992b) Road deaths of Westphalian owls: 
methodological problems. influence of road type and 
possible effects on population levels. The ecology irnd 
colz.rerwtiol7 of E~~ropenn 
o1~1.i(ed. by I.R. Galbraith, 
I.R. Taylor and S. Percival), pp. 94-100. Joint Nature 
Conservation Committee. Peterborough. (UK Nature 
Conservation No. 5). 
IUCN (1996) To~~ri.i.171, 
and protected 
ecuto~~ris~n 
arecia, 
p. 284 IUCN, Gland. 
Johnson, N.P. (1990) Nestiny  Bald Eayles (Hci1iaeer~1.r 
le~icoce~~/iirl~ia)urban areas of southeast Alaska:
in 
assessing highway construction and disturbance impacts. 
Tiailspi~Res. Rer. 1279, 60-68. 
Kanlmerbauer, H.. Selinyer, H.. Ronlmelt. R., Ziegler 
Jons, A,, Knoppik, D. & Hock, B. (1986) Toxic effects 
of exhaust enlissions on spruce Picen iibies and their 
reduction by the catalytic converter. Enl'iron. Poll~~t. 
(Series A ) .  42. 133-142. 
Kearsley, G.W. (1990) Tourism development and user's 
perceptions of wilderness in southern New Zealand. 
ALI.F/.Geogt: 21, 127-140. 
Kober W.W. & Kehler. S.E. (1987) An analysis of desiyn 
features in mitigating highway construction impacts on 
streams. Tviinapn Res. Rec. 1127, 50-60. 
Korn, H. (1991) Rapid repopulation by s~nall ~namlnals 
of an area isolated by roads. iMcri?7iiziiliii. 55, 629-632. 
Kupfer. J. (1996) Patterns and determinants of edge 
veyetation of a midwestern forest preserve. P11j.s. Geog. 
17, 62-76. 
Lamont, B.B., Rees, R.G.. Witkowski, E.T.F. & Whitten, 
V.A. 
(1994) 
Comparative 
size, 
fecundity 
and 
ecophysioloyy of roadside plants of Brii~I~.i.iii
hookeriirizir. 
J. irppl. Ecol. 31, 137-144. 
Lane, D. (1976) The vegetation of roadsides and adjacent 
far~nland of the Mornington Peninsula. Victoria, 
A~lstralia.Weecl Res. 16, 385. 
Langton, T.E.S., (Ed). (1989) Anij)l1ibii117.i. rind rocidi.. 
Proceeiiii~ga of the Tond Ttci~nel Conference, Rendaberg, 
FRG, Jal7~iirr). 1989, p. 202. ACO Polymer Products 
Ltd., Shefford, Enyland. 
Larwood. J.G. & Markham, D. (1995) Rondsc~ndgeologici~l 
conaervatio17-ii iiii.cuaaio~zcloc~uizenr,28 English Nature, 
Peterborough. 
Laursen, K. (1981) Birds on roadside verges and the effect 
of mowing on frequency and distribution. Biol. Con.i.er1'. 
20, 59-68. 
Leedy. D.L.. (1978) Highways and wildlife: implications 
for n~anagen~ent. 
Clii.i..i.$cii/ion, irivei~tor); irlzd iinai)..i.i.r 
of/i.i.li iincl~~ilcllif'e 
Pi.oceedi17g.i. of'ii i\'ationirl 
Iznbitnt-The  
SJ'I?~PO.F~UI?~, 
1111. 363-383. Fish and Wildlife Service, US 
Depart~nent of the Interior, Maryland. 
Lelievre, M. & Serodes. J.B. (1995) A new approach for 
the identification of environ~nental issues at stake in a 
roading project. 
Elzvirolz. iMg1?71zt, 44, 221-231. 
Lister. D.B. (1992) The argument for mitigation-case 
studies of impact ~nitiyation concerning Anadronlous 
Salmonid habitat. ,4177. Ei.rlz. Soc. Synzp. 13, 115-124. 
Lonsdale, W.M. & Lane, A.M. (1994) Tourist vehicles as 
vectors of weed seeds in Kakadu National Park, 
northern Australia. Biol. Conseri, 69, 277-283. 
Macdonald. I.A.W. & Frame. G.W. (1988) The invasion 
of introduced species into nature reserves in tropical 
savannas and dry woodlands. Biol. Coilaerv. 44. 67-93. 
Macdonald, I.A.W., Loope, L.L., Usher, M.B. & Hamann, 
0 .  (1989) Wildlife conservation and the invasion of 
nature reserves by introduced species: a global 
perspective. Biological iniiiaioris-ir 
globirl peral~ective 
(ed. by J.A. Drake. H.A. Mooney, F. di Castri, R.H. 
Groves. F.J. Kruger, M. Rej~nanek and M. Williamson), 
pp. 215-255. SCOPE & John Wiley & Sons, New York. 
Maddison, D.. Pearce. D., Johansson. O., Calthrop. E.. 
Litman, T. & Verhoef, E. (1996) The true cost of roan' 
/rn17apor/,Blueprint 5, p. 192. Earthscan Publications 
Ltd, London. 
Mader, H.J. (1984) Animal habitat isolation by roads and 
agricultural fields. Biol Con.i.er\'. 29, 81-96. 
Mader, H.J., Schell, C. & Kornacker, P. (1990) Linear 
barriers to arthropod movements in the landscape. Biol. 
Coii.rer\', 54, 209-222. 
Madsen, A.B. (1993) Fcrzti~ii pn.range.r in connection i ~ i t l ~  
lnrge rond.q.ste1?7.i., fI Hei/gelrog.r,hi it.^, bircii. irnd vesearch 
of 
~ f ~ e c t s ,  53 pp. 
Miljonlinisteriet, 
Danmarks 
Miljoundersogelser. 
Madsen, A.B. (1996) The ecology nncl con.reriiition of' tile 
otter (Lutra lutra) iri Deniiziirk. PhD thesis, Danlnarks 
Miljoundersogelser. 
Majer. J.D. & Beeston. G. (1996) The Biodiversity Index: 
an illustration usiny ants in Western Australia. Coi~aeri; 
Biol. 10, 65-73. 
Maltby. L., Forrow, D.M.. Boxall, A.B.A.. Calow. P. & 
Betton, C.I. (1995) The effects of motorway runoff on 
freshwater ecosystems: 1. Field study. Environ. Tosicol. 
Ciieiiz. 14, 1079-1092. 
Mansergh, I.M. & Scotts, D.J. (1989) Habitat continuity 
and social organisation of the ~nountain pyymy-possum 
restored by tunnel. J. Wilcll. i2.1g~~~n/, 
53, 701-707. 
Marrs, R.H., Frost, A.J., Plant, R.A. & Lunnis, P. (1992) 
The effects of herbicide drift on semi-natural veyetation: 
the use of buffer zones to ~llininlize risks. A.i.1~ect.r Api,i 
Biol. 29, 57-64. 
Marsh, D.M. & Pearman, P.B. (1997) Effects of habitat 
fragmentation 011 the abundance of two species of 
Leptodactylid froys in an Andean ~nontane forest. 
Con.i.eri. Bioi 11, 1323-1328. 
May, S A. & Norton, T.W. (1996) Influence of 
fray~nentation and disturbance on the potential impact 
0 1998 Blacksell Science Ltd, Globiii Ecoio~gj nrirl Biogeogr~iphv Leftem. 7. 317-333 


Ecological effects of roads 
33 1 
of feral predators on native fauna in Australian forest  
ecosystems. C.S.'R. 0. Wilcll. Res 23, 387400.  
Merriam, G.. Kozakiewicz, M., Tsuchiya, E. & Hawley, 
K. (1989) Barriers as boundaries for metapopulations  
and de~nes of Peroiilyscits le~icopiia in farm landscapes.  
Lcinii~c. Ecol. 2. 227-235.  
Michael. E.D. (1986) Use of roadside plantings by 
sonybirds for nesting. Trnnspn Rex Rec. 1075. 19-20. 
Morris, P.A. & Morris, M.J. (1988) Distribution and 
abundance of hedgehog (Erinnceli.~ eliropne~c.r) on New 
Zealand roads. A7.Z. J. Zool. 15, 491498. 
Munyuira, M.L. &Thomas, J.A. (1992) Use of road veryes 
by butterfly and burnet populations, and the effect of 
roads on adult dispersal and mortality. 
npl~l, Ecol. 29, 
316-329. 
Murphy. E.C. & Dowding, J.E. (1994) Range and diet of 
Stoats (~M~oteln 
in a New Zealand beech forest. 
erii~inen)  
IVZ. J Ecol. 18, 11-18.  
Murphy, S.M. & Curatolo, J.A. (1987) Activity budgets 
and movement rates of caribou encountering pipelines, 
roads, and traffic in northern Alaska. Ccii~.J. Zool. 65, 
2483-2490. 
Muskett. C.J. & Jones, M.P. (1980) The dispersal of lead, 
cad~niuln and nickel fro111 noto or vehicles and effects on 
roadside invertebrate macrofauna. Enl'iron. Polliit. 23, 
231-242. 
Newbey, B.J. & Newbey. K.R. (1987) Bird dynamics of 
Foster Road Reserve, near Ongerup, Western Australia. 
h'cit~ire conaeri;ntiol7: the role of reinncinta of' nntive 
vegetiition (ed. by D.A. Saunders. G.W. Arnold, A.A. 
Burbridge and A.J.M. Hopkins). pp. 341-343. Surrey 
Beatty & Sons Pty Ltd.. Chipping Norton. 
Nieuwenhuizen, W. & Apeldoorn, R.C. van (1995) 
,2.[(11?71?7nluse of' f'niinci pci.r.i.ngea on ncitioncil road A1 nt 
Oliiei~znnl.p. 47. Directorate-General for Public Works 
and 
Water 
Management, 
Road 
and 
Hydraulic 
Engineering Division, Delft, The Netherlands. 
Noss, R.F. (1995) The ecologiccil ejyect.r of' ronds, or the 
rocid to destriiction, pp. 11-21. Unpublisl~ed Report. 
Wildlands CPR, U.S.A. 
Owens, L.K. & James, R.W. (1991) Mitiyation of traffic 
~nortality of endanyered Brown Pelicans on coastal 
bridges. Trcmspn Res. Rec. 1312, 3-14. 
Oxley, D.J., Fenton, M.B. & Carmody, G.R. (1974) The 
effects of roads on populations of small mammals. J. 
f i p ~ ~ i
Eco~.11, 5 1-59. 
Parr, T.W. & Way, J.M. (1988) Manage~nent of roadside 
ueyetation: the lony-term effects of cutting. J. i!ppl. Ecol. 
25, 1073-1087. 
Pedevillano, C. & Wriyht. R.G. (1987) The influence of 
visitors on ~nountain goat activities in Glacier National 
Park. Montana. Bioi Coilaerl:, 39, 1-1 1. 
Przybylski, Z. (1979) The effects of automobile exhaust 
gases on the Arthropods of cultivated plants. meadows 
and orchards. Eilviron. Poll. 19, 157-161. 
Queensland Department of Main Roads (1997) Roi!cla in 
the 
Ii,et 
tropics. 
Plcin17i17g, deaigii, 
cori.rtr~ictio17, 
ii?ciinte17n17ce nncl ope~ation clrift beat prnctice i?7i!11~inl, 
O 1998 Black\lell Science Ltd, Globul Ecology orid Biogeogrcil~l~y 
Document No. 66515, p. 243. Gutteridge, Haskins & 
Davey Pty Ltd. Queensland. 
Ramsay. D. (ed.) (1994) Roadr itnil 17ntzire coizser1vttio17. 
G~iiclnnceon iinj)cict.~, ii~itigiition ii17clenl1n17cei?7ent, 
81 pp. 
English Nature, Peterborough. 
Reed. D.F. (1981) Mule Deer behaviour at a highway 
underpass exit. J. Wilcll. ~Jfgini~t, 
45, 542-543. 
Reed, R.A., Johnson-Barnard. J. & Baker, W.L. (1996) 
Contribution of roads to forest fragmentation in the 
Rocky Mountains. Conseri; Biol. 10, 1098-1106. 
Reid, J.W. & Bowles, 1.A. (1997) Reducing the impacts of 
roads on tropical forests. Ei~i;iroi~ii~ei~t.
39. 10-13. 
Reijnen. R. & Foppen, R. (1994) The effects of car traffic 
on breeding bird populations in woodland. I. Evidence 
of reduced 
habitat quality for willow warblers 
(P/Z~//O.FCOIJLI~
lroc/zibi.r)breeding close to a highway. J. 
cippl. Ecol. 31. 85-94. 
Reijnen. R., Foppen. R.. Ter Braak, C. & Thissen, J. 
(1995b) The efects of car traffic on breeding bird 
populations in woodland. 111. Reduction of density in 
relation to the proxi~nity of main roads. 
cipl~l. Ecol. 
32, 187-202. 
Reijnen, M.J.S.M., Veenbass. G.& Foppen, R.P.B. (1995a) 
Predicting the effects o/'nzotor~i,i!~. 
triiffic on breeding bird 
pop~tli!tio17.r.92 pp. Road and Hydraulic Engineering 
Division & DLO-Institute 
for Forestry and Nature 
Research, Delft. 
Reuter, J.E., Djohan, T. & Goldman, C.R. (1992) The use 
of wetlands for nutrient removal from surface runoff in 
a cold climate region of California-results 
from a newly 
constructed wetland at Lake Tahoe. 'Environ. ~Mgtiznt, 
36, 35-53 
Reznicek, A.A. (1980) Halophytes along a Michigan 
roadside with comments on the occurrence of halophytes 
in Michiyan. ~Mich. Bor. 19, 23-30. 
Rich, A.S., Dobkin. D.S. & Niles, L.J. (1994) Defining 
forest fragmentation by corridor width: the influence of 
narrow forest-dividing corridors on forest-nesting birds 
in Southern New Jersey Conseri; Biol . 8. 1109-1121 
Rodch. G.L. & Kirkpatrick, R.D. (1985) Wiltllifc use of 
roadside woody plantings in Indiana. Ti.ciii,ipiiRe5. Rec. 
1016. 11-15. 
Robinson, 
G.R. & 
Quinn, 
J.F. 
(1992) 
Habitat 
fragmentation, species diversity, extinction, and design 
of nature reserves. Al~l~lieclpoi,iilcitio17 biology (ed. by 
S.K. Jain and L.W. Botsford), pp.223-248. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrechdt. 
Rodriguez-Flores, M. & Rodi-iyuez-Castellon E. (1982) 
Lead and cad~nium levels in soil and plants near 
highways and their correlation with traffic density. 
Eili;iron. Polhit, (Serie.~ B). 4. 281-290. 
Romin, L.A. & Bissonette, J.A. (1996) Deer-vehicle 
collisions: status of state monitoring activities and 
mitigation efforts. Cl'ilcl. Soc. Blill. 24, 276-283. 
Salisbury. R. (1996) A de.rigi~ for .rttidyiilg edge eflect.~ in 
forests, Working Paper 9606. p. 32. Graduate School of 
the 
Environment, 
Macquarie 
University. 
Sydney, 
Australia. 
Salvig. J.C. (1991) F(i;irlinnpnaaager i,f'orhinclelse riied storre 


332 Ian E Spellerberg 
vejto~lneg. Fagliy rapport fra DMU, nr. 28, p.67. 
Danmarks Miljoundersogelser. 
Samways, M.J. (1989) Insect conservation and landscape 
ecology: a case-history of Bush Crickets (Tettigoniidae) 
in southern France. Ei7i;iron. Con.~ei\'. 16, 217-226. 
Sangwine, A.P. (1992) The establishn~ent and ~nanagement 
of roadside planting. A.rpecta Appl. Biol. 29, 195-201. 
Sarkar, R.K.. Banerjee, A. & Mukherji. S. (1986) 
Acceleration of peroxidase and catalase activities in 
leaves of wild dicotyledonous plants, as an indication 
of automobile exhaust pollution. Enviroil. Poll~ti. (Seriea 
A ) ,  42. 289-295. 
Saunders. D.A. & Hobbs. R.J. (1991) ~\~nt~iie
conseivation 
2: tile role of'coriiiiois, 442 pp. Surrey Beatty. Chippiny 
Norton. 
Saunders. D.A., Hobbs, R.J. & Elirlicl~,P.R. (1993) ~Vnti~re 
coi~.~eivntioi? 
offingii?enieii eco.u.ateiiza, 
3: recoi?.~triictioi~ 
326 pp. Surrey Beatty, Chipping Norton. 
Scanlon, P.F. (1987) Heavy metals in small mam~nals in 
roadside e~lviro~lrne~lts-implicationsfor food chains. 
Sci. rornl Eiiviion. 59. 317-323. 
Schmidt, W. (1989) Plant dispersal by motor cars. 
Vegetcitio, SO, 147-152. 
Schmitt, R.J.& Osenberg, C.W.(1996)Detecti~lgccological 
iinpncr.~: concepts find cii,pliuition.~ in conatnl 1inbiini.r. 
401 ~ p .  
Acadelnic Press. San Diego. 
Schonewald-Cox, C. & Buechner, M. (1992) Park 
protection and public roads. Conaervtirioi~ Bio1og)-ilie 
tlieory cinii pitictice of r~citziie coil.reivnrion, pre.i.ei~'citioi? 
tiilii innnageiileilt (ed. by P.L. Fieldler and S.K. Jain), 
pp. 373-395. Chapman Hall, New York. 
Seabrook, W.A. & Dettmann, E.B. (1996) Roads as activity 
corridors for Cane Toads in Australia. '1ViltIi ~llgn~izf, 
60, 363-368. 
Sherburne, J. (1985) Wildlife populations utilizing right- 
of-way habitat along Interstate 95 in northern Maine. 
Titin.rpii Res. Rec. 1016, 16-20. 
Singer, F.J., Lanylitz, W.L. & Samnelson, E.C. (1985) 
Design and construction of highway underpasses used 
by mountain goats. 77ciiispiz Res. Rer. 1016, 6-10. 
Sinnadurai. S. (1981) High pressure sodium street lights 
affect crops in Ghana. PVoiIci rrops (NovIDec), 120-122. 
Smith, D.S. (1993) Greenway case studies. Ecology of 
gieenn,nys-ciesign 
tind fliiicfioii qf liiienr corzsei1'iitioi7 
orens (ed. by D.S. Smith and P. Hellmund), pp. 161-208. 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis. 
Smith, W.H. (1976) Lead contamination of tlie roadside 
ecosystem. J. Air Pollur. Control A.rs. 26, 753-765. 
Southerland. M.T. (1995) Conserving biological diversity 
in highway devlopment projects. The Eiiviioi~~nenroi 
Proj'essioi~nl.17. 226-242. 
Spellerberg, I.F. (1991) Biogeographical 
basis 
for 
conservation. The srieiirific intintigernenr of feinper.tire 
coii~iiz~irzifiesfor. consrivciriorz. 31st Symposium of the 
British Ecological Society (ed, by I.F. Spellerberg, F.B. 
Goldsmith and M.G. Morris). pp. 293-322. Blackwell 
Scientific Publications, Oxford. 
Spellerberg, I.F. & Gaywood, M.J. (1993) Liileni fenrures: 
lirzeoi Iinhifiifs tiiltl i~~ilillife 
coriitlois, English Nature 
Research Report No. 60. 30pp. English Nature, 
Peterborough. 
Spellerberg, I.F. & Morrison. T. (1998) The ecological 
effects of new roads - a literature review. Science for 
Con.reii;ntioi~, 84. 
Department 
of 
Conservation, 
Wellington, New Zealand. 
Spencer, H.J. & Port, G.R. (1988) Effects of roadside 
conditions on plants and insects. 11. Soil conditions. J. 
~illpl. E C O ~  
25. 709-715. 
Swift, L.W. (1986) Filter Strip widths for forest roads in 
the southern Appalachians. Soiitlz. J iippl. Foror: 10,27734. 
Swihart, R.K. & Slade, N.A. (1984) Road crossing in 
Sigi?~oiioi?Iiispid~tsand ~Microiiis ocl~iognsiei: J ,2.lninii?ni 
65, 357-360. 
Thompson. J.R.. Rutter, A.J. & Ridout, P.S. (1986) The 
salinity of motorway soils 11. Distance from the 
carriayeway and other sources of local variation in 
salinity. J. iil~pl. Ecol. 23, 269-280. 
Thrasher, M.H. (1983) Highway impacts on wetlands: 
assessment, n~itigation, and enl~ancement measures. 
Tiiol.rpn Res. Rec. 948, 17-20. 
Timmins. S.M. & Williams. P.A. (1990) Reserve design 
and ~nanagement for weed control. Alterizati~'e.~to tile 
clzeii?icni coi7irol of ~veeii~(ed, by C. Bassett, L.J. 
Whitehouse and J.A. Zabkiewicz). FRI Bulletin 155, 
pp. 133-138. Ministry of Forestry, Forest Reseach 
Institute, Rotorua, New Zealand. 
Transfund NZ (1997) Project evnliicition i?lni~~inl, 
No. 
PFM2, p. 201. Transfund New Zealand, Wellinyton. 
Travis, M.D. & Tilsworth. T. (1986) Fish passage through 
Poplar Grove Creek Culvert, Alaska. Ti,nnspn Re.r. Rec. 
1075. 21-26. 
Trimble. G.R. & Sartz, R.S. (1957) How far from a stream 
should a logging road be located? J For. May, 1957. 
339-341. 
Tyser, R.W. &Worley. C.A. (1992) Alien flora in grasslands 
adjacent to road and trail corridors in Glacier National 
Park, Montana (U.S.A.). Coiiser~: Biol. 6, 253-262. 
U.S. Department of the Interior (1996) EIS No. 960048, 
Finn1 EIS, ;VPS, ,CII, Becrvei. Bosiiz Rim Road Piojecf. 
476pp. U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park 
Service, Michigan. 
Usher, 
M.B. (1987) Effects 
of 
fragmentation 
on 
communities and populations: a review with applications 
to wildlife conservation. 1Vnfiir.e coii.rei~,nfion: tile r.oie of' 
r.eii7ntiiits of' rzorive vegertrrioii (ed. by D.A. Saunders, 
G.W. Arnold, A.A. Burbidge and A.J.M. Hopkins). 
pp. 103-121. Surrey Beatty & Sons Pty. Ltd., Chipping 
Norton. 
Usher, M.B. (1988) Biological invasions of nature reserves: 
a search for generalisations. Bioi Corzsei~~. 
44, 119-135. 
Verboom, J. (1995) Dispersoi of irninlciir nnci iiifi'clsri uctiii.e. 
A n7oileI sfucly: sirminnq., p. 8. Directorate-General for 
Public Works and Water Management, Road and 
Hydraulic Engineering Division, Delft, The Netherlands. 
Vernieulen, H.J.W. (1994) Corridor f~~nction 
of a road 
verge for dispersal of Stenotopic Heathland Ground 
Beetles Carabidae. Biol. Conser.~~. 
69, 339-349. 
O 1998 Blackwell Science Ltd. Globcii Etologi. iiiid Biogeogrriphy Lrtrer.7, 7, 317-333 


Vestjens, W.J.M. (1973) Wildlife mortality on a road in 
New South Wales. Einu, 73, 107-112. 
Vos. C.C. & Chardon, J.P. (1998) EfTects of habitat 
fragmentation and road density on the distribution 
pattern of the moor frog Rnrzn nr1,niis. J. 1.111pi Ecoi 35, 
44-56. 
Wace, N. (1977) Assessmellt of dispersal of plant 
species-the 
car-borne flora in Canberra. Esoric species 
irz Ai/.rfi.nlin-fheii. esfilhlishi~~erzf 
and si/ccess (ed. by D. 
Anderson), Volume 
10. Pror. 
Etoi 
Sor. Ailsfl. 
pp. 167-186. 
Walker, D.A. & Everett, K.R. (1987) Road dust and its 
ellvirollmental impact on Alaskan Taiga and Tundra. 
Arrf. Alp. Res. 19, 479489. 
Ward, A.L. (1982) Mule Deer behaviour in relation to 
fencing and underpasses on Interstate 80 in Wyoming. 
fi.cir~spr~Res. Rec. 859. 8-13. 
Ward, N.I., Brooks, R.R. & Reeves. R.D. (1974) Effect of 
lead from motor vehicle exhausts on trees along a major 
thoroughfare in Pallnerstoll North, New Zealand. 
Envirorz. Poiluf. 6, 149-158. 
Warner, R.E. (1985) Demography and movements of free- 
ranging domestic cats in rural Illinois. J. M'ilcll. ~ U g n ~ n t .  
49, 340-346. 
Warner, R.E. (1992) Nest ecology of grassland passerines 
on road rights-of-way in central Illinois. Bioi Conserv. 
59. 1-7. 
Watkins, L.H. (1981) Eii~~ironnient(/l
ii,lpiict oj'r.oiicl,r ciiid 
rrirJjic, 268 pp. Applied Science Publishers. London. 
Watson, V.J., Rice, P.M. & Monnig, E.C. (1989) 
Environmental fate of Picloram used for roadside weed 
control. J Enl~iroi7, Q ~ ~ c i i  
18, 198-205. 
Way, J.M. (1977) Roadside verges and conservation in 
Britain: a review. Bioi Conser~!12. 65--74. 
Wells. M., Langton. T., Garland, L. & Wilson. G. (1996) 
The value of inotorway verges for reptiles-a 
case study. 
Rel~tiie siirl'ey i.izefliods: pi.oceedirzg.r of' (1 seniinni: 
~\;ol,enihei.1993 n f  tile Zooiogircii Sociery of Londorz (ed. 
by J. Foster and T. Gent), English Nature Science No. 
27, pp. 174-181. English Nature, Peterborough. 
Weste. G. (1977) Future forests-to 
be or not to be. 
Vicfoi,in:s Resolii.ce.s. 19. 26-27. 
Ecological effects of roads 
333 
Wester, L. & Juvik, J.O. (1983) Roadside plant 
communities on Maulla Loa, Hawaii. J Biogeogi: 10, 
307-316. 
Westing, A.H. (1969) Plants and salt in the roadside 
environment. Pilyropcirhoiogy. 59. 1174-1 18 1 
Wilcox, D.A. (1989) Migration and control of purple 
loosetrife 
(L~I/II.UIIZ 
L.) along highway
snlicnrin  
corridors. Enl~iron. ~l;lgiilnt, 13. 365-370.  
Wilcox, B.A. & Murphy, D.D. (1985) Conservatioll 
strategy: the effects of fragmentation on extinction. A I ~ I .  
"Vcir. 125. 879-887. 
Williams-Linera, G. (1990) Vegetation structure and 
environmental conditions of forest edges in Panama. J. 
Erol. 78, 356-373. 
Wilson, J.B., Rapson. G.L., Sykes, M.T.. Watkins, A.I. & 
Williams, P.A. (1992) Distributions and climatic 
correlatiolls of some exotic species along roadsides in 
South Island. New Zealand. J. Biogeogi: 19, 183-194. 
Wong, M.H., Cheung. Y.H. & Wong, W.C. (1984) Effects 
of roadside germination and root growth of Bvn.~.~icii 
ciliriensi.r and B. Pnrcrchiiieii.ris. Sri. forill Erz~~iroiz. 
33, 
87-102. 
World Bank (In press) Roads ili~d tile erlviron~nenr. The 
World Baiik, Eiiviroiliiieatally sustaiiiable developnieiit 
Vice-Presidency, p. 203. Transportation, Water & Urban 
Development 
Department, 
Transport 
Division. 
Washington. 
Yanes, M., Velasco. J.M. & Suarez, F. (1995) Permeability 
of roads and railways to vertebrates: the iinportallce of 
culverts. Bioi. Corzsei.~! 71, 217-222. 
Young, A. & Mitchell, N. (1994) Microclimate and 
vegetation edge effects in a fragmented podocarp-
broadleaf forest in New Zealand. Biol. Consei.1: 67. 
63-72. 
Yousef, Y.A., Baker, D.M. & Hvitved-Jacobsen, T. (1996) 
Modeling and impact of metal accumulation in bottom 
sediments of wet ponds. Sci. rotni Eiivirorz. 1891190, 
349-354. 
Zande, A.N. van der. Keurs. W.J. teu & Weijden, W.J. 
van der (1980) The impact of roads on the densities of 
four bird species in an open field habitat-evidence 
of 
a long-distance effect. Biol. Conseri: 18, 299-321. 
Q 1998 Black\vell Science Ltd, Globnl Ecology iinrf Biogrogrnpily Lrtter.7, 7, 317-333 
