--- 
source: 2007 000n-52.pdf
--- 

THE IMPACT OF OTTERS (LUTRA LUTRA) ON FISH IN STREAMS WITHIN A FISHPOND 
AREA 
 
Lukáš POLEDNÍK1*, Andreas KRANZ1, Kateřina POLEDNÍKOVÁ1, Aleš TOMAN2 & Bohumír 
LOJKÁSEK3 
 
1.  Department für Integrative Biologie, Institut für Wildbiologie und Jagdwirtschaft, Universität für 
Bodenkultur Wien, Peter-Jordan-Str. 76 1190 Wien, Austria.  Email:  polednici@centrum.cz 
2.  Otter Station Pavlov, Agency for Nature and Landscape Protection, Pavlov 54, xx Ledeč nad Sázavou, Czech 
Republic 
3.  Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 30. dubna 22, 701 03 
Ostrava, Czech Republic 
* Correspondence address: Stoječín 21, 378 81 Slavonice, Czech Republic 
 
Keywords: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, habitat use, radio-tracking, spraint analysis, electro-
fishing 
  
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
The density of predators is frequently limited by the availability of their main prey species, 
whereas rare prey species may be influenced by predators, if their density is high due to other 
prey categories (KREBS AND DAVIS, 1993). The present project tested one variation of this 
hypothesis by focusing on the impact of Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra L.) on stream-dwelling 
fish (rare prey species) in a landscape with many fish farms intensively used by otters (Czech-
Moravian Highland) and a control area without fish farms (Beskydy Mountains) (Figure 1).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Location of the study areas within the territory of the Czech Republic. Shaded area – otter distribution 
in the Czech Republic (after Kučerová et al. 2001, modified) 
 
 
Assuming that in an area with fish farms otter density is not limited by the abundance and 
biomass of fish in streams, but those  living in ponds, the following predictions were 
formulated:  
a) when fish in ponds are less available (e.g. due to ice cover) the habitat utilisation of 
otters changes;  


b) under such conditions, otters feed significantly more on stream-dwelling fish;  
c) this leads to a depletion of fish population in streams.  
 
 
2   METHODS 
 
The methods involved were radio-telemetry of otters (habitat utilisation) in the fishpond study 
area (Figure 2), electro-fishing before and after two winters (impact of otters on stream 
dwelling fish) and spraint analysis (diet of otters).  
 
N
E
W
S
-1175000
-1175000
-1170000
-1170000
-1165000
-1165000
-1160000
-1160000
 
Figure 2. Home ranges of four radio-tracked animals within the study area; size of the square 5 x5 km 
 
 
3   RESULTS 
 
To test prediction (a) (change of habitat utilisation), 2,398 locations were taken on six radio-
tracked otters.  Habitat utilisation (fishponds versus streams) of radio-tracked otters revealed 
two strategies to overcome severe periods of frozen fishponds.  Firstly, otters (five radio- 
tracked individuals) switched from mainly feeding at fishponds to mainly stream feeding 
which is in agreement with prediction (a). Secondly, otters (one radio-tracked otter) restricted 
their movements to a small part of the annual home range, e.g. a single fishpond, where, due 
to technical peculiarities of the pond, access was still available despite a thick ice layer.  
Pooled data showed a switch in habitat use. During warm periods, otters spent 55% of their 
time on ponds and 45% on streams, whereas during cold periods they spent 30% on ponds 
compared with 70% on streams (χ2 = 43.6, df = 2, n = 2429, P < 0.001). 


In order to test prediction (b), the diet of the otter was assessed upon the analysis of 
1,385 spraints found along the banks of the Bolikovsky Stream.  A seasonal comparison 
indicated significant differences in the occurrence of the three different ecological groups of 
fish in the diet of otters (χ2 = 29.26, df = 6, P < 0.001).  In winter, significantly more stream- 
dwelling fish (brown trout) were found in the spraints, than during the rest of the year (χ2 = 
27.9, df = 2, P < 0.001), whereas no differences were found in the occurrence of stream- 
dwellers, fishpond dwellers and intermediate fish species during spring, summer and autumn 
(χ2 = 1.5, df = 4, NS).  The detailed monthly distribution of occurrence of trout shows that 
they are most frequent in January followed by November and December.  The amount of trout 
in the diet of otters fluctuated more in the study area than in the control one (F=27.0, df1=3, 
df2=3, P < 0.001).  The results from the diet analyses were in accordance with prediction (b).  
In order to test prediction (c), electro-fishing was carried out on selected streams. It 
revealed dramatically low values of abundance and biomass of fish in streams in the fishpond 
area. The results show differences along river stretches, as well as seasonal differences in the 
fish assemblages (varied between 5.1 to 426.0 kg/ha).  However they did not confirm a 
significant decline of fish during winter as predicted by prediction (c). 
 
 
4   DISCUSSION 
 
The following conclusions were drawn:  
1. Fishponds increase the carrying capacity of the area for otters.  
2. This increase in otters may decrease fish populations in streams within the fish 
pond area.  
3. The extent of decrease depends on the duration of the ice period and the number of 
otters adopting different strategies.   
4. Other factors, such  as stream and fishpond management and fish migrations, 
affect the biomass of stream fish.  
 
 
5   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The study was financed by the Czech Grant Agency (206/00/0824), the Czech Otter 
Foundation Fund and Grant Agency of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic 
(A6093105). 
 
 
6  REFERENCES 
 
KREBS  J.R.  & DAVIES N.B. 1993. An Introduction to Behavioural Ecology. Blackwell Science Ld., Oxford. 
KUČEROVÁ M., ROCHE, K. & TOMAN, A. 2001. Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) distribution in the Czech Republic. 
Bulletin Vydra 11: 37-39. (in Czech, with English summary) 
  
 
 
 
 
