--- 
source: 2007 000n-24.pdf
--- 

 
1
ISRAEL’S OTTER (LUTRA LUTRA) POPULATION - STATUS AND FUTURE 
CONSERVATION 
 
Amit DOLEV1, 2, Amichai GUTER1,3, David SALTZ2 & Noga KRONFELD-SCHOR3 
 
1.  Israel Mammal Center, Society for the Protection of Nature in Israel, Hashfela 4, Tel Aviv,66183, Israel. 
2. Mitrani Department for Desert Ecology, Jacob Blaustein Institute for Desert Research, Ben Gurion University 
of The Negev, Israel. 
3.  Department of Zoology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. 
email: amit_dol@inter.net.il  
 
 
Abstract. Until the middle of the 20th century otters were abundant in Israel on all coastal rivers extending from 
the Lebanese border to the Tel Aviv area, as well as along the Jordan River basin from its source to the Dead 
Sea. The Harod and the Yizrael Valleys served as a corridor between the Jordan River and the coastal plain 
populations. However, during the 1960s the otter population underwent a dramatic decline due to illegal 
hunting, water pollution, and the drainage of aboveground water sources.  
The first surveys, conducted in the 1980s and 1990s, illustrated a stable population in the Hula and the 
Harod Valley; no evidence of otters was found in the southern Jordan River, while along the coastal plain, 
evidence of only a few individuals were found.  Little information about the current distribution of the otter 
population in Israel has been published since then until a comprehensive survey was conducted in 2000-2001.  
This was followed by increased research efforts in the following two years (2001-2003), including distribution 
surveys every six months. These latest observations confirm that: 
 
1. 
Otters are present in aquatic habitats and fishponds in the Hula Valley, in the northern Jordan River 
catchments and the Harod Valley.  
2. 
A single record from the Zvulun Valley and Carmel coastal area in 2000 suggests the existence of a 
remnant population along the coast, which may become extinct. 
3. 
New findings have indicated previously undocumented otter activity in the Golan Heights.  
4. 
A landscape bottleneck between the Harod and Yisrael Valleys may act as a barrier and prevent the re-
colonisation of the coastal region. 
 
Keywords: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, conservation, population, Israel  
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Until the middle of the 20th century, Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) were abundant in Israel on 
all coastal rivers extending from the Lebanese border in the north to the Soreq River in the 
south (Tel Aviv area), as well as along the Jordan River basin from its sources to the Dead 
Sea, including the Hula Lake and the Sea of Galilee.  The Harod and Yizrael Valleys served 
as a corridor between the Jordan River catchments and the coastal plain populations.  During 
the 1960s the otter population underwent a dramatic decline due to illegal hunting, water 
pollution, and the drainage of aboveground water sources (MENDELSON AND YOM-TOV, 
1999).  
Since 1964, otters are fully protected in Israel by law, resulting in poaching and 
culling becoming an insignificant threat.  Despite this legislation, the drastic decline in otter 
numbers and continued degradation of otter habitats, increase the risk of isolating non-viable 
sub-populations.  The regional status of the otter has recently been categorised as “Critically 
Endangered” (DOLEV AND PEREVOLOTSKY, 2003). 
The connection of the Israel otter population to other Eurasian otter populations 
depends on continuous freshwater or wetlands areas. The distribution of this habitat in the 
Middle East extends along the western regions of the Mediterranean Sea, but is limited by the 
desert from the east and south.  Consequently, the Israeli otter population, with that of Jordan 


 
2
(along the Jordan River (REUTHER ET AL., 2000)), forms the south eastern border of the 
Mediterranean-Arab range of the Eurasian otter.  The only possible connection of this 
population to the wider European populations is along wetlands in Lebanon and western Syria 
leading to the Turkish population.  
Little information about the current distribution of the otter population in Israel has 
been published since the first initial surveys performed in the 1980s (MACDONALD, MASON 
AND SHALMON, 1986) and 1990s (SHALMON, 1994).  These surveys illustrated a stable otter 
population in the Hula and Harod Valleys.  No evidence of otter presence, however, was 
found along the Jordan River, south of Bet-She’an, to the Dead Sea.  Along the coastal plain, 
evidence of only a very small population, in the Zvulun Valley (near Haifa) was found.  
MACDONALD AND MASON (1986) summarised the otter’s situation as:  
 
Virtually extirpated in the coastal regions. Good populations still exist in the river catchments, including Sea of 
Galilee, but because almost the entire population is concentrated in the one system, it must be considered 
threatened.  Within the system, otters occur in uplands, agricultural lowlands, and fish ponds. 
 
An unpublished sequential survey from 1994 found no change along the Jordan River 
catchments (SHALMON, 1994).  It assumed the coastal plain population to be extinct, and no 
attempt was made to survey it.  
An extensive survey, carried out in 2000 by the Mammals Research Centre of the 
Society for the Protection of Nature in Israel, covered most of the historic otter ranges.  No 
new trends were documented (DOLEV, 2000).  On a complimentary field trip later that year, 
new findings from the coastal plain were reported (REUTHER AND DOLEV, 2000).  This survey 
also marked the onset of increased research efforts of otters in Israel. 
Over the last two years, distribution surveys were conducted every six months.  In this 
paper we review the results of these surveys, and discuss the current situation of and prospects 
for the otter population in Israel. 
 
 
2   MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
2.1 Distribution 
Monitoring the distribution and abundance of populations is of key importance in species 
conservation.  Since otters are nocturnal and elusive, the distribution and abundance of their 
population is difficult to determine (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986).  
Field surveys, based on a standardised methodology, can be replicated at intervals in 
order to assess changes in distribution and status over time and compare the status of different 
populations.  During 2001–2003, we conducted otter surveys in seven regions of northern 
Israel (Figure 1) every six months, using a standardised methodology based on the use of 
spraints (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986).  
 
On each occasion, 17-124 sites were surveyed in these seven regions (Figure 2), 
totaling some 2000 km2 of wetland areas.  The survey areas included valleys and plateau 
regions, rich with fishponds and water reservoirs.  Most of the streams along these regions 
flow only during winter, but serve for otter movement and as sprainting sites year round.  The 
connection between the regions consists, at most, of one narrow wetland corridor.  These 
surveys served as the basic tool for identifying changes in otter distribution in Israel over the 
years.  In addition, all available records of otter observations in Israel were collected.  
Demographic, temporal and spatial patterns of otter distribution in the country are disc 
ussed.  
 
 


 
3
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Seven regions studied 
 
 
3   RESULTS 
 
The results reflect the distribution of otters in each of the seven regions and indicate changes 
in it during this period.  
 
f. Coastal 
plan 
g. Yisrael 
e. Zvulun
d. Harod 
c. Emek 
Hayard
b. Golan
a. Hula


 
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Results from each of the seven regions studied showing negative and positive sites. 
3.1 Hula Valley and upper Jordan River (Figure 2a)  
This region is about 200 km2.  In each survey 9-22 sites were checked.  Of these, over 80% 
were positive (average of four surveys with more than nine sites).  This is the best region for 
otters in Israel today and includes large areas of fishponds, natural streams and canals, which 
flow year round and are not subject to industrial pollution.  The origin of several streams in 
1
4
2
3
5
7
3
16
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
May
2000
Oct 2000Oct 2001
May
2002
Oct 2002
May
2003
Golan Heights
8
1
1
3
7
2
19
2
15
7
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
May
2000
Oct
2000
Oct
2001
May
2002
Oct
2002
May
2003
Hula valley
Negetive
Positive
2
4
4
5
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
May
2000
Oct
2000
Oct
2001
May
2002
Oct
2002
May
2003
Zvulun valley
6
6
6
8
4
9
4
12
18
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
May
2000
Oct 2000Oct 2001
May
2002
Oct 2002
May
2003
Harod valley
10
1
1
1
1
7
9
14
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
May
2000
Oct
2000
Oct
2001
May
2002
Oct
2002
May
2003
Yisrael valley
7
8
1
2
8
2
2
12
12
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
May
2000
Oct
2000
Oct
2001
May
2002
Oct
2002
May
2003
Emek Hayarden
1
2
4
6
6
10
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
May
2000
Oct
2000
Oct
2001
May
2002
Oct
2002
May
2003
Coastal plain
a
d
g 
e
f
b
c


 
5
the northern part of the Hula Valley is in Lebanon and hence it may serve as a possible 
corridor to more northern populations. 
 
 
3.2 Golan Heights (Figure 2b) 
This region is about 800 km2.  There are 12 water reservoirs in this area, each of about 1 km2 
and identified as potential otter habitat based on this characteristic.  In 2002, evidence of otter 
activity was found in this area for the first time.  Thirty one percent of the 12-19 sites were 
positive (average of two surveys with more than 12 sites).  Two road-kills were also reported.  
About five streams can serve as corridors between the Golan Heights and the Hula valley and 
the Sea of Galilee.  Another possible corridor may also connect this population to adjacent 
populations in Syria and Jordan. 
 
3.3 Sea of Galilee and the Jordan Valley (Figure 2c) 
The Sea of Galilee is the biggest natural freshwater lake in Israel.  Otter occupancy was found 
in all water inlets and in the outlet to the Jordan Valley, a narrow basin (up to one kilometre 
width of wetland area) along almost 20 kilometres of the southern Jordan River.  Most of the 
positive sites in this area (61.3% - average of three seasons with more than 10 sites surveyed) 
were found around the lake.  The narrow Jordan Valley is the only corridor connecting to the 
southern otter population of the Harod Valley. 
 
3.4 Coastal area (Figure 2f) 
This region, between Haifa and Tel Aviv, consists of about 400 km2 of wetlands, including 
polluted rivers, fishponds and water reservoirs.  It seems a suitable area for otters.  However, 
except for the otter field trip of October 2000, when we found spraints at two sites, we have 
no evidence of otter occurrence there.  Also, there appears to be no potential connection to 
other otter populations, except through the Mediterranean Sea to the Zvulun Valley in north 
Israel, or to coastal regions in Lebanon. 
 
3.5 Zvulun Valley (Figure 2e) 
This region, along the northern coastline of Israel, covers about 110 km2 and includes 
fishponds, one small wetland reserve and several heavily polluted rivers.  Otter observations 
in this area were documented until the end of the 1980s.  However, no signs of otter activity 
were found in the surveys.  Otter populations in this area could be connected to potential 
northern populations along the Lebanese coast through the Mediterranean Sea. 
 
3.6 Harod Valley (Figure 2d) 
This area, the second most important region for otters in Israel, is about 190 km2, with many 
fishponds, natural springs and canals.  About 63% of the sites were positive (average of four 
surveys with more than 12 sites).  The western part of the Valley tapers and ends in a narrow 
passage toward the Yisrael Valley. 
 
3.7 Yisrael Valley (Figure 2g) 
This region, of about 200 km2, lies between the Harod Valley and the coastal plain.  The 
valley includes several fishponds and water reservoirs along the main streambed, which flows 
seasonally. In this region, only two positive observations were made in 2000 and again in 
2001 at the same site; no other positive records are known.  Furthermore, as far as is known, 
there are no documentations (skulls, skins, or historical records) of otters from this area in the 
20th century. 
 


 
6
4   DISCUSSION 
 
Based on our study it is now clear that otters are present in aquatic habitats and fishponds in 
the Hula Valley, the northern Jordan River catchments and the Harod Valley.  Otter activity in 
fishponds represents an alternative to natural habitats, which have disappeared.  In several 
regions, where only a few natural wetlands remain, otters can no longer find sufficient prey in 
natural habitats and must rely on fishpond farms.  One record, from the coastal area in 2000, 
suggests the occasional presence of some otters along the coast, which may become, or 
already are, extinct.  We assumed a very small otter population existed there up to the end of 
the 1970s.  It disappeared as a result of a synergistic effect of habitat destruction and isolation 
from other otter populations (Lebanon coastal population, or Jordan valley population), along 
with pollution of rivers and streams in this area.    
Previously undocumented otter habitat was found in the Golan Heights.  These 
findings may be of high importance, since they may indicate a connection between this 
population and otters in Syria as well as in Jordan, and thus might serve as a connection 
between the species in Israel and these northern populations. 
It appears that the potential otter habitats in Israel are divided into two geographically 
separated groups.  Four regions are concentrated in the eastern side of the country, mainly 
along the Jordan River catchments, and still show stable otter activity.  The other three 
regions are in the western part of Israel along the coastal plain, where otters were abundant in 
the past but are apparently currently extinct or near extinction.  The only possible connection 
between the Jordan Rift Valley in the east and the coastal area in the west is the Harod 
Valley-Yisrael Valley corridor.  The overall size of wetland areas in the eastern part is 
relatively small.  As a result, the carrying capacity of these regions is also low.  Furthermore, 
it is unclear whether there is a connection between the population in Israel and other 
populations in neighboring countries.  The otter population in Israel is therefore in serious 
danger of isolation.  Population fragmentation is expected to reduce within population genetic 
polymorphism and increase genetic differentiation.  Loss of polymorphism can reduce 
potential for adaptation.  At very small sizes, the probability of inbreeding depression 
increases and combined with reduced polymorphism may hasten the extinction of the 
population.  Therefore, a minimum level of gene flow is considered important for the viability 
of small, isolated populations.  
One possible way to cope with this threat is to expand the otter distribution, thus 
increasing the otter population size.  The only suitable unoccupied habitat is the one beyond 
the bottleneck between Harod and Yisrael Valleys, which appears to prevent movement of 
otters westward, towards the previously populated coastal plain.  It is currently unclear why 
otters do not occupy or pass through this area.  Understanding what causes this invisible 
barrier is essential for defining the appropriate mitigation that will enable the spread of the 
otter population westward.  The distance between the two closest fishponds in these two 
valleys is only five kilometres, with a narrow strip, about one kilometre in width, of moderate 
terrain between them.  We suggest that an action aimed at improvement of the habitat in the 
relevant area around this bottleneck and restoration of wetlands in Yisrael Valley, together 
with translocation of otters from a remote healthy population, will contribute to the return of 
otters to its former habitats in the western part of the country (i.e. the coastal plain), thus 
strengthening the otter population in Israel in general.  Otters were extirpated from wide areas 
of Europe during the second half of the 20th century.  In the last decade, a moderate return of 
otters to former habitats was reported.  Recolonisation could be explained by restoration 
efforts that lead to improvement in the conditions of those habitats (decrease in pollution, 
poaching and habitat distraction) and by intensive translocations and re-introductions of otters 
from healthy populations.  During the 1990s, several successful re-introduction projects were 


 
7
carried out in Europe; in Spain (SAAVEDRA, 2005), the UK (JEFFERIES ET AL. 2005), the 
Netherlands (JANSMAN, LAMMERTSMA AND NIEWOLD, 2004), and the Czech Republic 
(TOMAN, ROCHE AND ROCHE, 2005). 
Such an action in Israel must be preceded by an intensive restoration project around 
the release site and educational efforts among the local and the general public. We believe 
that unless action is taken, otters will disappear from Israel’s landscape.   
 
 
5   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
We would like to thank the Israel Nature and Parks Authority for their assistance. This work 
was supported by the Israeli Ministry of the Environment. 
 
 
6   REFERENCES 
 
DOLEV, A. 2000. Otter Survey in Israel. Internal report for the Society for the Protection of Nature in Israel 
(SPNI), Tel Aviv 11pp. [In Hebrew]. 
DOLEV, A. & PEREVOLOTSKY, A. (Editors) 2003. The Red Data book of Threatened Vertebrates in Israel. 
Israel Nature and National Parks Protection Authority and Society for the Protection of Nature in Israel Press, 
Jerusalem. [In Hebrew. English version in press]. 
JANSMAN, H., LAMMERTSMA, D. & NIEWOLD, F. 2005. Monitoring the re-introduction of the otter in the 
Netherlands by telemetry and the genetical & hormonal analysis of spraints. In: Eurasian Otter Conference: The 
Return of the Otter in Europe – Where and How? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye, 30 June – 5 July 2003. 
(Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, P., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J) Pp.  xx-xx. International Otter Survival 
Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye  
JEFFERIES, D.J., WAYRE, P., WAYRE, J. & SHUTER., R. 2004. Re-introductions as a tool in otter conservation. 
In: Eurasian Otter Conference: The Return of the Otter in Europe – Where and How? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of 
Skye, 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, P., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) Pp.  xx-xx. 
International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye. 
MACDONALD, S.M., MASON, C.F. & SHALMON, B. 1986. A survey for otters in Israel. Oryx, 20: 233-236. 
MASON, C.F. & MACDONALD S.M. 1986.  Otters: Ecology and Conservation. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
MENDELSON, H. &YOM-TOV, Y. 1999. Fauna Palaestina Mammalia of Israel. Pp. 159-163. Keter Press, 
Jerusalem. 
REUTHER, C., RIFAI, L., QARCAS, M., ABU BAKER, M. & AMR, S.Z. 2000. Results of an initial field survey for 
otters (Lutra lutra) in Jordan. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 17: 75-79. 
REUTHER, C.  & DOLEV, A. 2000. New findings of otters (Lutra lutra) in Israel. IUCN Otter Specialist Group 
Bulletin, 17: 80-82. 
SAAVEDRA, D. 2004. Re-introduction of the otter in Spain. In: Eurasian Otter Conference: The Return of the 
Otter in Europe – Where and How? Sabhal Mor Ostaig. Isle of Skye, 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, 
J.W.H., Yoxon, P., Gutleb, A.C. &  Ruiz-Olmo, J.) Pp.  xx-xx. International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle 
of Skye  
SHALMON, B. 1994. Otter Survey in Israel. Internal report for the Society for the Protection of Nature in Israel 
(SPNI), Tel Aviv, 4pp. [In Hebrew]. 
TOMAN, A., ROCHE, M. & ROCHE, K. 2005. The introduction of otters (Lutra lutra) in the Czech Republic. In: 
Eurasian Otter Conference:  The Return of the Otter in Europe – Where and How? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of 
Skye, 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, P., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) Pp.  xx-xx. 
International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye 
 
