--- 
source: 2007-13.pdf
--- 

Wildlife Damage Management, Internet Center for
USDA National Wildlife Research Center -
StaﬀPublications
University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Year 
Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore
populations
Eric M. Gese
This paper is posted at DigitalCommons@University of Nebraska - Lincoln.
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/icwdm usdanwrc/576


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 
ERIC M. GESE 
INTRODUCTION 
There is increasing concern about the status and distribution of terrestrial 
carnivore populations throughout the world (Schaller, 1996). Changes in 
land-use practices, habitat loss and fragmentation, sanctioned human per- 
secution, declines in natural prey, disease, illegal poaching, and increased 
competition within carnivore guilds have brought about a general decline 
in several carnivore populations with some species now occupying a frag- 
ment oftheir former range. The continued loss of suitable habitat due to an 
ever expanding human population has placed the issue of conservation and 
protection of some carnivores as a top environmental priority and/or con- 
troversy for many agencies and organizations. Paramount to carnivore re- 
covery, reintroduction, or development of management plans and policies, 
is having reliable and accurate information regarding the status, health, 
and well-being of the carnivore population of concern. One of the most 
commonly asked questions when dealing with carnivore conservation is: 
where are the animals, how many are there, and what is the population 
trend? These questions often place biologists and managers in the difficult 
position of determining the status of a carnivore population. Biologists 
need reliable methods that provide accurate data on the distribution, abun- 
dance, and population trend of a species in order to make informed deci- 
sions and recommendations to policy makers. Many carnivores are 
secretive, nocturnal, far-ranging, live in densely vegetated habitats or re- 
mote areas, or exist at extremely low densities, making censusing and 
monitoring a carnivore population very difficult, if not sometimes seeming- 
ly impossible. 
Monitoring of a carnivore population may be performed at various 
levels of resolution. First, biologists may only need to know where a particu- 
lar carnivore occurs (i.e., species distribution). Second, the biologist may 
need to know how many animals are in an area (i.e., species abundance). 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 1 373 
Animal abundance may be assessed in two ways: relative and absolute 
abundance. Relative abundance uses indices of animal abundance (e.g., 
track counts, scent-post visitation rates) that can be compared over time or 
between areas, but of itself does not estimate animal numbers. In contrast, 
absolute abundance involves using methods to actually count animals and 
then estimate the number or density of animals in the population. With 
repeated sampling over time, both relative indices and absolute estimates 
of animal abundance can be used to monitor population trends. For many 
carnivore species this amount of information may be adequate. However, if 
the population trend indicates an increasing or declining population, then 
it may be important for the biologist to ask: why is the population chang- 
ing? This final question involves examining the demographic processes of 
birth, death, emigration, and immigration that determines the persistence 
of a population. 
The objective of this chapter is to describe the techniques that have been 
developed to census and monitor terrestrial carnivores and a discussion of 
the advantages and disadvantages of each technique. Many of the tech- 
niques described herein still need an in-depth evaluation as they pertain to 
accuracy and reliability in monitoring population trends of carnivores. This 
chapter will focus on terrestrial carnivores only (suborder Fissipedia); inclu- 
sion of aquatic carnivores would require an entire chapter to itself. Capture, 
handling, or immobilization procedures will not be discussed; the volume 
of literature is enormous and species specific (readers should consult Pond 
& O'Gara, 1994; Schemnitz, 1994, and references therein). Current 
methods for censusing or surveying wild carnivores range across the gradi- 
ent of accuracy, reliability, and cost. I have included references of several 
studies that used, or attempted to use, a technique to determine species 
distribution or abundance. These references are only provided as examples 
of studies, and are not inclusive of all studies using that specific technique. 
SOME CONSIDERATIONS BEFORE IMPLEMENTING A 
MONITORING PROGRAM 
Before embarking on a large-scale effort to monitor a carnivore population, 
the biologist or manager should carefully consider what question(s) they 
are asking, and if an estimate of population size is needed, then one must 
decide on the precision and accuracy of the estimate required to answer 
that question (Lancia et al., 1994; Zielinski & Stauffer, 1996). For example, 
if a biologist is assessing the abundance of a very rare carnivore that numb- 
ers 50 animals in the wild, then even a slight decline in population size 


374 1 E. M. Gese 
would be critical and surveys would need to be sensitive to even the small- 
est change in numbers. In contrast, a carnivore population numbering 
5000 animals could use a survey with less sensitivity because a slight de- 
cline would not be catastrophic to that population. The precision (the 
measure of how close an estimate is to the expected value), accuracy (the 
measure of how close an estimate is to the true population size), power 
(the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is in fact false and 
should be rejected), sample size, survey design, and the statistical assump- 
tions of each method should be considered before implementing a 
monitoring program (Peterman, 1990; Reed & Blaustein, 1997; Van Strien 
et al., 1997). Macdonald et al. (1998a) provides a thorough review of statisti- 
cal considerations when designing a monitoring program. Two major prob- 
lems that a biologist must typically address when developing a monitoring 
program is observability or catchability of the animal (the probability is 
generally < I) and the size of area to be sampled because time and money 
constrain sampling the entire area (Lancia et al., 1994, Macdonald et al., 
1gg8a). In addition, the costs, logistics, manpower, and time constraints 
must all be considered before deciding on the usefulness of a particular 
method to monitor a carnivore population. These considerations sound 
quite intuitive and fundamental, but success of the project may hinge on 
careful examination, prior planning, and development of an appropriate 
study design (Skalski & Robson, 1992; Macdonald et al., 1gg8a). 
METHODS EMPLOYED TO DETERMINE SPECIES 
DISTRIBUTION 
Often biologists may only need to know if a species is present in an area. 
This fundamental question is needed to determine the presence and dis- 
tribution of rare, threatened, or endangered species. Methods typically em- 
ployed to determine species distribution include habitat mapping, 
questionnaires, interviews, sighting reports, or confirmation of a sign left 
by the species in question. Any survey method (direct or indirect measures) 
that provides an estimate of animal abundance provides distribution infor- 
mation as well. However, for discussion of those survey methods see under 
'Methods of estimating animal abundance'. 
Habitat mapping 
Biologists should not necessarily race out into the bush and start looking 
for animals or signs of them. Careful consideration regarding the kind of 
suitable habitat required for a species followed by examination of habitat 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 1 375 
maps or aerial photos (if available) can save time (e.g., Macdonald et al., 
1998a). Habitat suitability models have been developed for many carnivore 
species. With the continued development of satellite imagery, remote sens- 
ing, and Geographic Information Systems (GIs), areas containing suitable 
habitat for a particular species can be identified allowing for maximization 
of survey effort. Surveys can then be stratified by habitat types or land 
classes (Macdonald et al., 1998a). In the UK, use of landscape data from the 
Countryside Information System (CIS), plus existing mammal records and 
knowledge of habitat requirements, were used to predict mammal distribu- 
tion on a national scale (Macdonald et al., 1998a). Use of CIS has also been 
instrumental in identifying potential habitat for restoration of carnivores 
(e.g., Mladenoff et al., 1995; Mladenoff & Sickley, 1998). 
Questionnaires, interviews, and sighting reports 
One of the simplest methods of determining species distribution, and poss- 
ibly gaining a subjective estimate of animal abundance, is collecting sight- 
i n g ~  and general impressions from various people in the field. 
Questionnaires, interviews, and sighting reports from hunters, trappers, 
rangers, mail carriers, tourists, guides, and field personnel have been used 
with some success to measure animal distribution, and sometimes animal 
abundance, of different species of Canidae (Lemke & Thompson, ~gGo; 
Allen & Sargeant, 1975; Harris, 1981; W. Clark & Andrews, 1982; Fuller et 
al., rggza; Fanshawe et al., 1997)~ 
Felidae (Tewes & Everett, 1982; Erickson, 
1982)~ Mustelidae (Fortenbery, 1970; Hillman & Linder, 1973; Powell, 
1982; Strickland & Douglas, 1984; Slough & Smits, 1985; Melquist & Dron- 
kert, 1987)~ Procyonidae (Kaufman et al., 1976; W. Clark & Andrews, 
1982), and Ursidae (Kolenosky & Strathearn, 1987). Questionnaires were 
successfully used in the UK to detect the presence of elusive carnivores, 
such as pine marten, Martes martes (Strachan et al., 1996)~ western pole- 
cats, Mustela putorius (Birks & Kitchener, ~ g g g ) ,  
and wildcats, Felis silvestris 
(Balharry & Daniels, 1997). 
More in-depth questionnaires or interviews with persons with intimate 
knowledge of the area and who spend considerable time in the field (e.g., 
trappers, game wardens, rangers, guides) not only may provide a range and 
status report (Kaufman et al., 1976; Fuller et a!., 1992a), but may also be 
used to obtain a general, subjective estimate of abundance (e.g., Allen & 
Sargeant, 1975; Harris, 1981). Many agencies compile status reports using 
this method to access the relative abundance and distribution of carnivores, 
particularly in countries that are unable to invest the considerable resources 
more accurate population assessment requires (e.g., Fanshawe et al., 1997). 


376 ( E. M. Gese 
Questionnaires have been used when agencies require a large-scale as- 
sessment of carnivore distribution (e.g., Fuller et al., ~ggza), 
or in circum- 
stances when little is actually known about the biology of the species in 
question. This is especially useful for rare species that have a wide distribu- 
tion. For example, surveys by park staff, field workers, and rangers provided 
a subjective estimate (absent, rare, common, uncommon) ofthe abundance 
of African wild dogs (Lycaon pictus) throughout the African countries (Fan- 
shawe et al., 1997). In North America, questionnaires are often sent to 
trappers and field personnel to monitor trends in furbearer populations (W. 
Clark & Andrews, 1982; Strickland & Douglas, 1984). Drawbacks of this 
technique include misidentification of carnivores, low response levels to 
the questionnaire, and concentration of animal sightings along roads or 
near human habitation (i.e., rare carnivores inhabiting areas of low human 
density may go undetected or unreported). 
Presence of sign 
Sightings of the carnivore species in question allow for direct confirmation 
of species presence. Spotlight surveys have been commonly used to detect 
rare or endangered nocturnal species, such as black-footed ferrets (Mustela 
nigripes). However, in the absence of visual confirmation of the animal 
itself, biologists may resort to surveys of animal sign to determine whether 
a species is present in a given area. Sign surveys have been used to deter- 
mine species distribution of most carnivore groups, including several felids 
(Schaller & Crawshaw, 1980; Newman et al., 1985), mustelids (S. Mac- 
donald & Mason, 1982; Melquist & Hornocker, 1983; Richardson et a!., 
1985; Melquist & Dronkert, 1987; Macdonald et al., 1gg8a), ursids (Pelton 
& Marcum, 1977; Kohn, 1982), and canids (Sargeant et al., 1993). Several 
different methods of sign surveys have been used, including counting 
tracks, scats, scratches, burrows or dens, and hair samples. For example, 
diurnal surveys for signs (scat, tracks, fresh dirt diggings) of black-footed 
ferrets have been conducted throughout the prairie ecosystem to locate 
remnant populations (Fortenbery, 1970; Hillman & Linder, 1973; Richar- 
dson et al., 1985). Trained dogs have even been used to search for ferrets 
and their burrows (Dean, 1979). Tewes & Schmidly (1987) describe the use 
of predator calls to attract ocelots (Leopardus pardalis) in south Texas. Con- 
spicuous burrows of American badgers (Taxidea taxus) and European 
badgers (Meles meles) have been used as an indicator of species presence 
(Macdonald et al., 1gg8a). Surveys at bridges crossing over rivers have been 
used to determine presence or absence of river otters, Lutra canadensis 
(S. Macdonald & Mason, 1982; Melquist & Dronkert, 1987). Sprainting 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 1 377 
(defecation) surveys for otters (L. lutra) provide good distribution informa- 
tion in the UK, but appear to be unrelated to otter abundance (Conroy & 
French, 1987; Kruuk et al., 1986). Schaller & Crawshaw (1980) identified 
tracks and scats to determine the presence and movement patterns of jag- 
uars (Panthera onca). Hairsnares or hair tubes can be used to assess dis- 
tribution through species identification by characteristics of the hair (e.g., 
Adorjan & Kolenosky, 1969; Moore et al., 1974) or DNA techniques (Foran 
et al., 1gg7a,b; Paxinos et al., 1997; Kohn et al., 1999). 
Track plates 
The use of track plates to determine carnivore presence is gaining in popu- 
larity, particularly for the detection of forest carnivores (e.g., Zielinski, 
1995). This technique provides a reliable measure of species distribution or 
presence, but may be unreliable for determining relative animal abun- 
dance. Track counts in prepared beds have been used to estimate the extent 
of mink (Mustela vison) distribution, but not numbers of mink (Burgess & 
Bider, 1980; Humphrey & Zinn, 1982). Similarly, smoked track plates have 
been used to record tracks of weasels (Barrett, 1983; T. Clark & Campbell, 
1983), marten, Martes arnericana (Barrett, 1983; Zielinski & Truex, 1995)~ 
and fisher, M. pennanti (Zielinski, 1995). A detailed description of tracking 
plates and the implementation of both enclosed track-plate boxes and un- 
enclosed track plates is provided by Zielinski (1995). In general, track surfa- 
ces may be produced from smoked or carbon-sooted aluminum plates, 
contact paper (tacky, white paper), chalk, or ink. A visual and/or olfactory 
lure is used as an attractant to bring the animal to the tracking station and 
while investigating the attractant the carnivore leaves tracks on the tracking 
surface. Identification of tracks, getting the animal to step on the plate, 
transportation of the tracking plates, and protecting the track plates from 
the weather are all problems that require some prior planning when using 
this technique (but see Zielinski, 1995 and Zielinski & Truex, 1995 for 
suggestions). 
Remote cameras 
A relatively new method that is gaining popularity is the use of remote 
cameras set along trails, near bait stations, or nests. Remote cameras have 
been used successfully to detect several forest carnivores (Kucera et al., 
1995; Foresman & Pearson, 1998) and elusive or nocturnal felids (Joslin, 
1982; Rappole et al., 1985). The cameras are commercially available from 
several manufacturers (see a list in Kucera et al., 1995). They can be set 
up to be triggered by an animal tripping a line, or activated remotely by 
, 


378 1 E. M. Gese 
pressure-sensitive plates, motion or heat detectors, or breaking of an in- 
frared beam. While these camera systems are mostly used to detect the 
presence of carnivores (Kucera et al., 1995; Naves et al., 1996; Foresman & 
Pearson, 1gg8), or identify predators at bait stations or nests (Savidge & 
Seibert, 1988), they could potentially be used to determine animal abun- 
dance if individuals can be identified by artificial tags (e.g., ear tags, radio 
collars) or natural features (e.g., pelage characteristics) and then applying 
mark-recapture estimators. Remote cameras have the added benefit that a 
permanent photographic record is available for examination by other re- 
searchers. Disadvantages of remote cameras are expense (although some 
systems are not too costly), getting animals to trigger the camera (similar to 
problems associated with track plates), and the time delay between photo 
acquisition and development of the film (i.e., results are not instan- 
taneous). However, development of digital cameras that download images 
into a computer may negate this concern. 
Some considerations for sign surveys 
A problem with using sign to determine carnivore distribution is the proper 
and consistent identification of tracks, scats, burrows, and hair samples. 
Species identification from scats can be assisted by the use of fecal bile acid 
patterns detected by thin-layer chromatography (Major et al., 1980; John- 
son et al., 1981). Examination of hair samples with a light microscope and 
comparison to a hair key (e.g., Adorjan & Kolenosky, 1969; Moore et al., 
1974) or reference collection can provide species identification. Recent ad- 
vances in DNA techniques have opened the door for more accurate assess- 
ment of species identification and carnivore distribution based upon scat or 
hair samples (Foran et al., 1gg7a,b; Paxinos et al., 1997; Kohn et al., 1999). 
It should be emphasized that most sign surveys only provide distribution 
information. However, these DNA techniques can also be used to identify 
individual animals allowing for estimation of population size (Kohn et d., 
1999). The amount of sign left behind by an animal does not appear to 
correlate with animal density for most carnivores (Messick & Homocker, 
1981; Melquist & Hornocker, 1983; Messick, 1987). Also, simply because 
observers fail to find sign does not necessarily indicate species absence. 
Surveys for species presence used as measures ofanimal abundance 
The previously discussed sign surveys can serve a dual purpose. In their 
most rudimentary form they provide distributional information, but with 
standardization of the methodologies and the amount of effort conducting 
the survey, sign surveys may also be used as an index of animal abundance. 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 1 379 
For example, if certain areas or habitats are repeatedly surveyed over time 
and the number of hours of searching are recorded, then biologists may 
standardize their surveys to trackslhour, scats/hour, etc., allowing for trend 
information over time or comparisons between areas. 
METHODS FOR ESTIMATING ANIMAL ABUNDANCE 
Once a biologist has determined that a carnivore is present in a particular 
area, the next question that may need to be answered is: how many animals 
are there and what is the trend in abundance? Biologists may monitor ani- 
mal abundance by direct methods of counting the animals themselves, or 
indirectly by counting animal sign (Macdonald et al., 1998a). Estimating 
animal abundance requires consistent and standardized application of a 
technique to be able to detect changes or differences with some degree of 
accuracy, precision, and power (Macdonald et al., 1998a). Thus, for any of 
the following techniques, biologists must maintain a standardized study 
protocol for the survey or count that is used and consistently apply that 
protocol to all future surveys to allow for direct comparisons over time. 
Whether biologists use sign surveys, indices of relative abundance, or 
measures of absolute animal abundance, caution should be exercised when 
examining population trends for carnivores. Assessing rates of increase or 
decrease from trend data should be done carefully, taking into account the 
precision and accuracy of the methods used to determine population size 
estimates or indices of relative abundance. Biologists should be aware of the 
influence of other variables on survey results. Biologists should consider 
the characteristics of the animals themselves (e.g., behavior, size, color); the 
topography and vegetation where the survey will be executed; temporal fac- 
tors; observer experience, ability, and fatigue; and the spatial distribution of 
the species concerned (i.e., widely distributed versus high density). Before 
embarking on population trend analyses, biologists and researchers should 
examine the assumptions and estimate the power of the survey technique 
in its ability to detect population changes; see Gerrodette (1987), Eberhardt 
& Simmons (1gg2), and Kendall et al. (1992) for more details. 
Indirect methods 
Scent-station surveys 
One ,of the most common sign surveys utilized for indexing carnivore 
abundance in North America is scent-post or scent-station surveys. Scent- 
post surveys have been widely used to estimate the relative abundance of 
several canids (Linhart & Knowlton, 1975; Roughton, 1979; Sumner & Hill, 


380 ( E. M. Gese 
1980; K. Johnson & Pelton, 1981; Morrison et al., 1981; Roughton & 
Sweeny, 1982; Conner et al., 1983; Travaini et al., ~ggG; Sargeant et al., 
1998), cats (Conner et al., 1983), mustelids (Brown, 1969; Lord et al., 1970; 
Humphrey & Zinn, 1982; Melquist & Dronkert, 1987; Hein & Andelt, 
~ggs), 
raccoons (Sumner & Hill, 1980; W. Clark & Andrews, 1982; Conner 
et al., 1983; Smith et al., 1gg4), and bears (Lindzey et al., 1977; Kohn, 1982). 
Scent-post or scent-station surveys involve placing a scented tablet (e.g., 
fermented egg extract, mackerel oil) or other attractant within a I-m circular 
area of sifted dirt. Tracks left by an animal are identified to species, and 
presence or absence of the species is recorded. Typically, stations are 
spaced at a predetermined interval along roads or trails and then visited for 
three to four consecutive nights to record tracks; the sifted area is swept 
smooth after each night. Biologists should consider the movement patterns 
and home-range size of the species of interest when determining the spac- 
ing of the stations (i.e., close spacing for close-ranging species, increased 
spacing for larger species). The frequency of animal visitation to operable 
stations (i.e., not disturbed by wind, rain, vehicles) is used as an index of 
abundance. For details on this method and its application, see Linhart & 
Knowlton (1975)~ Roughton (1979)~ and Roughton & Sweeny (1982). Biolo- 
gists interested in using scent-post surveys should consult Smith et al. 
(1994) and Sargeant et al. (1998) prior to implementation. While some 
biologists reported that scent-station surveys reflect changes in raccoon 
abundance, Smith et al. (1994) found no association between visitation 
rates and density of raccoons. Knowlton (1984) found a positive correlation 
(r2 = 0.79) between coyote (Canis latrans) scent-station indices and es- 
timated coyote density. Seasonal changes in habitat use and visits to 
multiple stations by a single animal can contribute to invalid correlations of 
animal density and visitation rates. Sargeant et al. (1998) makes several 
recommendations regarding sample unit specification and interpretation 
of scent-station surveys. Misidentification of tracks, problems with the 
weather (mostly wind and precipitation), wariness of animals in relation to 
the sifted substrate, and a fairly labor intensive technique are items to be 
addressed when considering scent-station surveys. 
A variation of the scent-post survey that has been used to index dingo 
(C. 
familiaris dingo) populations is the activity index (Allen & Engeman, 
1995, Allen et al., ~ggG). 
This index of animal visitation simply uses a sifted 
dirt area on a road without any scent or lure to attract animals. The number 
of track sets crossing the sifted area is used to assess relative abundance 
and calculate a variance estimate (Engeman et al., 1998). 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations ( 381 
Scat deposition transects 
The rate at which scats are deposited along established roadways has been 
used as an estimate of relative abundance for some canid species, mainly 
coyotes (Clark, 1972; Davison, 1980; Andelt & Andelt, 1984) and wolves, 
Canis lupus (Crete & Messier, 1987). The general methodology involves des- 
ignating transects or routes along a roadway, clearing all scats from the 
road, then returning and collecting all scats encountered two weeks later. 
The scat index is computed as the number of scats collected per transect per 
14-day period (Davison, 1980). If transects vary in length, or the time per- 
iods vary in the number of days between collections, then the index can be 
standardized to scatslkmlday. Scat deposition rates for coyotes were found 
to be correlated (r2 = 0.97) with estimates of animal density derived from 
mark-recapture techniques using radioisotope tagging of feces (Knowlton, 
1984). For long-term monitoring, scat transects should be conducted along 
the same routes at the same time of year to avoid introducing biases asso- 
ciated with differential prey digestibility (hence differential scat deposition 
rates) and seasonal changes in food items consumed (Andelt & Andelt, 
1984). Misidentification of scats and heavy vehicle traffic on roadways can 
also be problematic when using scat deposition counts. Use of DNA tech- 
niques for identifying species from scats may alleviate the problems of mis- 
identification (Foran et al., 1gg7a,b) and identification of individual 
animals collected during scat deposition transects could potentially be used 
to estimate population size (Paxinos et al., 1997, Kohn et a!., 1999). 
Track counts along a transect 
Tracks left by carnivores along river beds, dry washes, sandy fire breaks or 
roads, or on snow-covered roads and trails have been used as a relatively 
simple and inexpensive measure of relative animal abundance for several 
species of canids (Beasom, 1g74a; CrGte & Messier, 1987; Palomares et al., 
199 G), felids (Anderson, 1981; Van Dyke et al., 1986; Van Sickle & Lindzey, 
1991, 1992; Smallwood & Fitzhugh, 1995; Beier & Cunningham, 1996; 
Stander, 1998), mustelids (Ruff, 1939; Quick, 1944; de Vos, 1952; Coulter, 
1966; Priklonski, 1970; Fitzgerald, 1977; Powell, 1982; S. Johnson, 1984; 
Slough & Smits, 1985; Golden, 1986; Melquist & Dronkert, 1987), ursids 
(Pelton & Marcum, 1977; Stirling et al., 1980; Kohn, 1982; Kendall et a!., 
19921, and Egyptian mongooses, Herpestes ichneumon (Palomares et al., 
1996). Carnivores that occupy regions that receive snow have been 
monitored through the use of counting tracks along established transects 
within one to two days following fresh snowfall. Winter track counts along 
standard transects have been routinely used to index the relative abundance 


382 1 E. M. Gese 
and population trends of marten (Slough & Smits, 1989, weasels (Ruff, 
1939; Quick, 1944; Priklonski, 1970; Fitzgerald, 1977)~ and fisher (de Vos, 
1952; Coulter, 1966; Powell, 1982; S. Johnson, 1984). Similarly, counts of 
tracks left by cougars (Puma concolor) along dry washes has been used to 
index animal abundance (Beier & Cunningham, 1996). Golden (1986) was 
able to conduct aerial track counts for wolverines (Gulo @lo) in unforested 
areas of Alaska. Ballard et al. (1995) reported good precision between line- 
intercept sampling of tracks and estimates of wolf density based upon 
radiotelemetry. This technique was repeatable, efficient, reasonably accu- 
rate, and relatively inexpensive. Biologists attempting transect counts of 
tracks should be aware of some pitfalls. Misidentification of tracks and low 
power to detect population changes can occur when using track counts 
(Van Sickle & Lindzey, 1991; Kendall et al., 1992; Ballard et al., 1995; Beier 
& Cunningham, 1996). Precision can be increased by increasing sampling 
effort (more transects), or increasing the length of transects if dealing with 
a far-ranging species (e.g,, cougars: Van Sickle Sc Lindzey, ~ g g ~ ) ,  
although 
see Kendall et al. (1992). Much of the power of this estimator is dependent 
upon a high rate of encountering sign along the transects (Kendall et al., 
1992). When working in areas with snowfall, variables one must consider 
include the condition and consistency of the snow, variable depth of snow 
(i.e., no snow negates data collection), temperature, and time of year. Ob- 
server experience at interpreting tracks is also crucial for consistent and 
reliable monitoring. 
Den and burrow surveys 
Ground and aerial surveys for active dens have been conducted along tran- 
sects as a method of indexing relative abundance of some carnivore species. 
Annual den surveys have been used to monitor populations of arctic fox 
(Alopex lagopus) in northern dry tundra (Macpherson, 1969; Garrott et al., 
1983), but appear to have little application in areas of coastal wet tundra 
(Anthony, 1996). Ground and aerial surveys for dens has been used to 
monitor kit fox (Vulpes macrotis) populations in desert environments 
(O'Farrell, 1987) and red fox (V. vulpes) populations on the prairie (Traut- 
man et al., 1974). The key to this survey technique is relatively open habitat 
with little vegetative cover and a carnivore species that makes conspicuous 
dens or burrows. These surveys can be relatively expensive (aerial searches) 
and/or labor intensive (ground searches), In general, this survey entails 
personnel walking or flying along a route or transect searching for active 
dens. The presence of feces or tracks at the burrow or den can assist in 
species identification. Ground surveys conducted along transects can also 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 1 383 
be used to calculate the density of dens if biologists record the perpendicu- 
lar distance from the transect to the den (Burnham et al., 1980). Conspicu- 
ous burrows dug by badgers have been used to indicate species presence, 
but there appears to be no correlation between density of burrows and ani- 
mal abundance (Messick & Hornocker, 1981; Messick, 1987). This tech- 
nique would probably not work well for indexing carnivores with large 
social units. No matter how large the pack, coyotes and wolves typically 
have one natal den to rear offspring (i.e., a pair of coyotes uses the same 
number of dens as a pack of seven coyotes). For animals that exist in packs 
or clans, the number of dens would more likely indicate the number of 
social units present across an area, but not the number of animals in each 
social unit. 
Vocalization response surveys 
For social carnivores that utilize long-range vocalizations (roars, howls, or 
whoops) to communicate, biologists have been able to use the response rate 
to simulated vocalizations as an estimate or index of relative animal abun- 
dance. Howling surveys for coyotes (Wenger & Cringan, 1977, 1978; 
Okoniewski & Chambers, 1984) and wolves (Harrington & Mech, 1982; 
Carbyn, 1982; Fuller & Sampson, 1988), roaring for lions, Panthera leo 
(Rodgers, 1974; Maddock et al., 1996; Ogutu & Dublin, 1998), and long- 
distance whoops for hyenas, Crocuta crocuta (Ogutu & Dublin, 1998) have 
all been used as a technique for estimating animal abundance. Vocalization 
response surveys typically employ recorded vocalizations, although human 
imitation of sounds is sometimes effective. Traveling along roads or trails 
and stopping at predetermined intervals, vocalizations are produced and 
then observers listen for a specified amount of time for a response from the 
target species. The biologist may conduct the survey over several nights and 
use the vocalization response as a means of estimating the relative abun- 
dance of the carnivore species. Standardization and consistency of this 
method is needed for reliable and comparable results for trend analyses. 
Biologists should also be aware ofthe seasonal, social, temporal, and spatial 
factors that may influence carnivore vocalization rates (Laundrk, 1981; Har- 
rington & Mech, 1982; Walsh & Inglis, 1989; Gese & Ruff, 1998). For an 
accurate population census, biologists need to intensively survey the area of 
interest to obtain adequate coverage (Fuller & Sampson, 1988). In the 
Masai Mara National Reserve of Kenya, Ogutu & Dublin (1998) estimated 
that 20% of the study area had to be sampled to acquire reliable estimates 
of hyena and lion abundance. 


384 1 E. M. Gese 
Frequency of depredation complaints 
The frequency of livestock depredation complaints may be useful as an 
indicator of relative abundance and population trend under the general 
belief that animal abundance is correlated to rates of livestock predation. 
Because this relationship has not been explicitly tested, biologists should be 
cautious of this technique as depredation rates are subject to changes in 
livestock stocking rates, habitat type, size of area used, husbandry practices, 
and environmental variables (Fritts, 1982; Lindzey, 1987; Mech et al., 
1988a). 
Some considerations when using indirect methods 
Indirect methods provide only relative abundance, not absolute abundance, 
and must be applied consistently for any reliable comparisons between 
areas, habitats, or over time. Whenever indices of relative abundance are 
used, biologists should attempt to learn if the relationship between relative 
indices and absolute abundance is positively and monotonically related, or 
if the relationship is nonmonotonic. Is the relationship linear with a con- 
stant slope, or linear with a variable slope? Indices that are nonmonotonic 
to animal abundance are of little use in monitoring trends of a carnivore 
population. Comparison of an inexpensive indirect method to a more ex- 
pensive direct method could prove worthwhile for calibration of the less 
expensive technique. During such a calibration, the techniques should be 
performed concurrently and may need to be conducted on a species-speci- 
fic, habitat-specific, and seasonal basis. Unfortunately, few indices of rela- 
tive abundance have been properly tested with a known carnivore 
population estimate. Of those that have been examined, results are mixed. 
Knowlton (1984) found positive correlations between scat deposition rates 
along transects and estimated coyote population density. Scent-post survey 
indices were also positively related to coyote density. In contrast, Smith et 
al. (1994) found no association between scent-station visitation rates and 
density of raccoons. 
Direct counts 
Direct counts involve the actual counting of animals themselves, in con- 
trast to counting sign. These counts may use either dead animals (e.g., 
mortality samples, road kills, harvest reports) or live animals (e.g., trapping 
or sightings). The assumptions of direct counts and the estimators used to 
determine population size should be carefully reviewed (Caughley, 1977; 
Burnham et al., 1980; Skalski & Robson, 1992). Counts may involve total 
counts of the area, or a subsample of the area and extrapolation to the rest 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 1 385 
of the area of concern. Stratification of subsamples to different habitat types 
or land classes may increase the validity, usefulness, and precision of the 
surveys (Macdonald et al., 1gg8a). 
Harvest reports and pelt registration 
A method of gaining insight into abundance (and certainly distribution) of 
a species is examination of harvest and trapping records. Current and his- 
torical harvest records can be a valuable resource in obtaining a general, if 
subjective, idea of animal distribution and abundance (Seton, 1909; 
Hewitt, 1921). In the Canadian provinces, mandatory pelt sealing reports 
has also been used to estimate furbearer population trends (Novak, 1987). 
In the UK, a decline in otter numbers was observed through a decrease in 
hunting success (Strachan & Jefferies, 1996). While detailed information 
from harvested animals can be used to construct models for population 
estimation (W. Clark & Andrews, 1982), harvest data alone is generally not 
a reliable estimate of population trends. Pelt prices, differential harvest 
methods, and environmental and social factors all influence harvest rates. 
W, Clark & Andrews (1982) speculated that harvest surveys may indicate 
population trends of furbearers with low commercial value because harvest 
trends would be less affected by management actions and fur prices. Other 
problems associated with the use of harvest records include hunters and 
trappers not keeping records, trappers having faulty memories, only some 
hunters submitting reports (usually successful hunters), and sometimes 
trappers will give inaccurate reports to avoid tax auditors (Sanderson, IggIa; 
W. Clark & Andrews, 1982). For rare species (e.g., coati, Nasua navica), fur 
harvest reports are generally unreliable for population trends (Kaufman, 
1987), while harvest reports for abundant furbearer populations (e.g., long- 
tailed weasel, Mustelafienata) may be reliable measures of population trend 
(Hamilton, 1933; Barbour & Davis, 1974). 
One method for estimating harvest rate and population size of bobcats 
(Lynx rubs) uses the total number of harvested animals, the sex-specific age 
distribution of the harvest, and the estimates of harvest effort over the span 
of years represented in the age distribution (Paloheimo & Fraser, 1981; 
Rolley, 1987). Interpretation of the sex and age structure of harvested 
samples is commonly used to assess changes in black bear ( Ursus american- 
us) populations (Whelan et al., 1978; Lindzey & Meslow, 1980; Kolenosky & 
Strathearn, 1987). However, when using harvest data, the validity of the 
underlying assumptions should be carefully evaluated (Gilbert et al., 1978). 
Population trends of carnivores have been examined in relationship to past 
and current harvest records for many species of Canidae (Elton, 1942; 


386 ( E. M. 
Gese 
Chitty, 1950; W. Clark & Andrews, 1982; Erickson, 1982), Felidae (Elton & 
Nicholson, 1942; Erickson, 1982; Lindzey, 1987; Rolley, 1987; Quinn & 
Parker, 1987), Mustelidae (Hamilton, 1933; Barbour & Davis, 1974; W. 
Clark & Andrews, 1982; Powell, 1982; Linscombe et al., 1982; Strickland & 
Douglas, 1984; Melquist & Dronkert, 1987), Procyonidae (Seton, 1909; 
Hewitt, 1921; Sanderson, IgsIa; W. Clark & Andrews, 1982; Kaufman, 
1987; Novak, 1987)~ and Ursidae (Whelan et al., 1978; Lindzey & Meslow, 
1980; DeMaster et al., 1980; Kolenosky, 1987). However, no in-depth test- 
ing has been conducted to confirm the relationship between animal popu- 
lation density and reports of fur or animal harvest statistics. 
Road mortality samples 
The frequency of animal carcasses found on roadways has been proposed 
as a measure of population trend for some carnivore species, usually as an 
index of relative abundance. For example, the number of raccoons (Procyon 
lotor) and skunks (Mephitis mephitis) killed along roads have been used as 
measures of relative abundance (W. Clark & Andrews, 1982; Bartlett & 
Martin, 1982). While this technique is intuitively simple and appealing, 
differences in animal behavior and movements, habitat, traffic density, 
road surface, and road density likely influence kill rates of some carnivores; 
nor has the relationship between population density and road kill rate been 
adequately examined. However, Birks & Kitchener (1999) calibrated road 
kills of polecats with numbers estimated from intensive live trapping. Road 
mortality samples can be used to confirm species presence. 
Spotlight surveys 
Spotlight surveys are a cost effective method typically used for assessing the 
relative abundance of nocturnal animals. Estimates of relative abundance 
for nocturnally active carnivores, such as raccoons (Andrews, 1979; 
Frederickson, 1979; Rybarczyk et a!., 1981; W. Clark & Andrews, 1982), 
badgers (Hein & Andelt, ~ggs), kit foxes (Ralls & Eberhardt, 1gg7), red 
foxes (Weber et al., ~ g g ~ ) ,  
black-footed ferrets (Campbell et al., 1985), and 
skunks (Schowalter & Gunson, 1982; Rosatte, 1987), have been determined 
with spotlight surveys. These surveys usually involve two observers stand- 
ing in the back of a truck being driven slowly (16-24 km/hr) along road- 
ways, scanning the road and sides for animals using spotlights of 
> ~ o o o o o  candlepower. When an animal is detected, usually by eye 
shine, the driver stops the vehicle and the observers identify the animal 
(using binoculars or a spotting scope). The mileage and time of detection is 
recorded for each sighting. An index of animals/km is then calculated. 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations 1 387 
Spotlight counts can be used to estimate population size with line-tran- 
sect methodology if the perpendicular distance to the sighted animal is 
recorded (Thompson et al., 1998). Transects need to be fairly lengthy ( > 10 
km), and because vegetative cover and topography can influence visibility 
(Whipple et al., 1994; Ralls & Eberhardt, 1997) which influences survey 
results, these variables should be considered in survey design (Ralls & Eber- 
hardt, 1997). For a description of this technique in assessing fox abun- 
dance, see O'Farrell (1987) and Ralls & Eberhardt (1997). Surveys can be 
conducted over several nights (repeated counts) to obtain a measure of 
sampling error (Norton-Griffiths, 1975). Large samples with replication are 
needed to detect changes in population size with any statistical power (Ralls 
& Eberhardt, 1997). Surveys can be conducted seasonally and annually for 
population trend analysis. Spotlight counts do not work well in areas con- 
taining low densities of carnivores. Spotlight counts may also be used to 
acquire a relative estimate of the abundance of certain prey species at the 
same time (Barnes & Tapper, 1985; White et al., 1gg6), but Ralls & Eber- 
hardt (1997) believed that spotlighting was not a sensitive method for as- 
sessing prey abundance. 
Catch-per-unit-effort 
Live trapping certainly gives a positive confirmation of species presence 
and hence distribution. The number of animals captured per trap-night can 
also be used as an index of relative abundance of carnivores. Live trapping 
is expensive and labor intensive, and can be ineffective in areas with low 
carnivore density. In addition, standardization of capture procedures and 
variation among individual trappers can cause problems with this method- 
ology. This technique has been used to assess the relative abundance of 
coyotes (F. Clark, 1972; Davison, 1980; Knowlton, 1984), island gray foxes, 
Urocyon littoralis (Crooks, 1gg4), kit foxes (Cypher & Spencer, 1gg8), felids 
(Rolley, 1987), and some species of mustelids (Lindzey, 1971; Simms, 1979; 
Bjorge et al., 1981; King, 1981; Hein & Andelt, 1995). For weasels, the 
number of animals caught per trap-night appears to be linearly related to 
animal density (Caughley, 1977)~ 
but few experimental tests have been con- 
ducted for other carnivore species. 
Capture-mark-recapture 
A technique originally developed with small mammals and proving useful 
for estimating carnivore populations is capture-mark-recapture. While 
mark-recapture is fairly time consuming, labor intensive, and costly, 
it does provide a reliable estimate of population size (i.e., absolute 


388 1 E. M. 
Gese 
abundance) for many carnivore species, including badger (Messick & Hor- 
nocker, 1981), ringtail (Bassariscus astutus) and coati (Kaufman, 1987)~ 
mus- 
telids (Bailey, 1971; King & Edgar, 1977; Messick & Hornocker, 1981; 
Douglas & Strickland, 1987; Rosatte, 1987; Strickland & Douglas, 1987)~ 
bears (Pelton et al., 1978; DeMaster et al., 1980; Miller & Ballard, 1982; 
Kruuk, 1995; Miller et al., 1997), canids (F. Clark, 1972; Todd ct al., 1981; 
Roemer et al., 1994), felids (Schaller, 1972; Currier et al., 1977; Mills et al., 
1978; Miller, 1980; Quinn & Parker, 1987), hyenas (Kruuk, 1972b; Sillero- 
Zubiri & Gottelli, 1993). and raccoons (Sanderson, 1g51b). Mark-recapture 
can provide relatively accurate estimates of population size if sample sizes 
are adequate, data collection techniques are unbiased, and the basic as- 
sumptions for the population estimator are not violated (see Caughley, 
1977; Wilson et al., 1996; or Thompson et al., 1998; and references therein 
for assumptions of various estimators). This method involves capturing 
and marking individuals, then recapturing a number of the marked indi- 
viduals again and estimating population size based upon the ratio of 
marked to unmarked animals recaptured using one of several models (Pol- 
lock, 1981; Seber, 1982; Montgomery, 1987). 
Marks employed to tag the animal include ear tags, radio collars, dyes, 
and physiological markers such as radioactive isotopes. 'Recapture' may 
involve actual physical recapture of the animal, resighting of the animal 
(Smuts, 1976; Todd et al., 1981; Miller et al., 1997), returns from trappers or 
hunters (Sanderson, ~ g y b ) ,  
recapture via fecal analysis for a physiological 
marker, or a combination of these (e.g., Currier et al., 1977). Kohn et al, 
(1999) estimated coyote population size by identifying individual animals 
through fecal DNA analysis combined with mark-recapture methodology. 
Several different models for population estimation (e.g., Petersen, Jolly- 
Seber, Schnabel) can then be used to calculate population size (Caughley, 
1977; Jolly, 1982; Seber, 1982; Thompson et al., 1998). Many of these 
models are now available on software for use on a computer (e.g., programs 
CAPTURE by White et al., 1982; NOREMARK by White, 1996; EAGLES by 
Arnason et al., 1991). If the area of interest or trapping effort is known, then 
density estimates can be derived. Researchers should review capture-recap- 
ture methodologies outlined by Caughley (1977) or Thompson et al. (1998) 
to assist in the study design prior to implementation. Various trapping 
designs have been used with mark-recapture estimators. Roemer et al. 
(1994) used a trapping grid to estimate population size of island gray foxes. 
A trapping web design was used to estimate numbers of Indian mon- 
gooses, Herpestesjavanicus (Corn & Conroy, 1998). F. Clark (1972) captured 
and marked coyote pups at dens in the spring then recaptured them during 
late-summer trapping sessions. 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations ( 389 
The use of physiological markers has received increased interest as a 
means of marking animals and then using 'recaptures' of those marks to 
estimate animal abundance with mark-recapture estimators. The method 
involves capture of the animal, injection or oral dosing of the animal, then 
resampling the animal at a later date either by direct recapture and blood 
sampling, collection of labeled scats, or examination of hunter killed ani- 
mals. Radioactive isotopes have been used to determine densities of black 
bears and other carnivores (Pelton & Marcum, 1977; Kruuk et at., 1980). 
Radioactive zinc has been used to estimate the density of European badgers 
by injecting the captured individuals, then detecting the isotope in feces 
and estimating the population size from the ratio of radiolabeled to normal 
feces (Kruuk et al., 1980; Kruuk & Parrish, 1982). Kruuk et al. (1993) used 
radioactive isotopes to mark otter spraints and then identify which otter 
deposited that spraint. With the added responsibility and permitting 
needed to handle and store radioisotopes, researchers have examined other 
compounds to serve as individual markers for carnivores. Knowlton et at. 
(1988) reported that oral doses of iophenoxic acid were detectable or trace- 
able in coyotes up to IG weeks post-ingestion. Johnston et at. (1998) tested 
the use of chlorinated benzenes as physiological markers for coyotes and 
found that injection or ingestion (oral dose) of some compounds were de- 
tectable up to IOO days later in feces and blood serum. Biomarkers have 
been used to estimate animal abundance in canids (Davison, 1980; Knowl- 
ton, 1984), mustelids (Kruuk et al., 1980; Kruuk & Parrish, 1982; Knaus et 
al., 1983; Melquist & Dronkert, 1987)~ 
raccoons (Conner et al., 1983; Conner 
& Labisky, 1985), and bears (Pelton & Marcum, 1977). 
Direct counts by removal 
For some species of furbearers, most often species that are considered 
pests, the removal method has been used to estimate animal abundance. 
The method has been used to estimate population size mainly on skunks 
(Skalski et al., 1984; Rosatte, 1987) and raccoons (Twichell & Dill, 1949; 
Fountain, 1975). Disadvantages of this technique is the lack of knowledge 
of what proportion of the population was missed or not captured, and how 
large an area was affected by the removal. Due to the economic importance 
of the furbearer species, intrinsic values, and/or the social and political 
ramifications, the removal method is rarely employed. 
Transect, strip, or area sampling 
In certain circumstances it may be possible for the biologist to directly 
count the number of animals along transects, strips, in quadrants, or with- 
in a defined area and estimate animal population size or density (Gates, 


390 1 E. M. 
Gese 
1979; Burnham et al., 1980; Rao et al., 1981; Bibby et al., rggza). While 
transect and quadrant surveys are commonly used for estimating popula- 
tions of ungulates, some of the larger carnivores may be surveyed with this 
technique. Trends in relative abundance can be compared from direct 
counts; absolute abundance may be estimated if correction factors are avail- 
able to account for problems with sightability (Samuel et al., 1987). Popula- 
tion estimates can also be calculated by distance methods along line- 
transects (Burnham et al., 1980). Software programs that will estimate 
population size using distance data along transects include DISTANCE 
(Buckland et al., 1993; Laake et al., 1993) and TRANSECT (Burnham et al., 
1980). Aerial surveys typically require a large carnivore occupying a rela- 
tively sparsely vegetated habitat that allows for maximum sightabi1ity. Aer- 
ial surveys have been used to estimate animal abundance of coyotes (Nellis 
& Keith, 1976; Todd et al., 1981), brown bears, Ursus arctos (Erickson & 
Siniff, 19G3), and polar bears, Ursus maritimus (Scott et al., 1959; Prevett & 
Kolenosky, 1982). Air and ship censuses of polar bears have been conduc- 
ted during the summer when bears are concentrated along the polar ice 
pack (Larsen, 1972). 
The number of animals sighted can be affected by weather, vegetation, 
visibility, and observer experience and fatigue. Miller & Russell (1977) com- 
pared aerial transect-strip counts and ground counts of wolves and reported 
that the behavior of the animals, width of the survey strip, and visibility all 
contributed to unreliable estimates ofwolves using aerial surveys over open 
tundra habitat. The use of ultraviolet, infrared, or thermal imagery photo- 
graphy has been proposed for enhancing sightability of polar bears 
(Lavigne & aritsland, 1974) and cougars (Havens & Sharps, 1998) during 
aerial surveys. Ground surveys are practical for smaller carnivores or ani- 
mals that can be readily viewed in open habitats, Population trends for coati 
were measured by making visual counts along walked transects (Kaufman, 
1987). Hyenas were sampled by ground transects in Africa (Hanby & By- 
gott, 1979). In certain situations, the entire area of interest may be sur- 
veyed, and through repeated sampling and reobservation, the entire 
population may be counted. For example, the wolves on Isle Royale have 
been observed and counted for decades, with each wolf pack counted on the 
island each winter (Jordan et al., 1967; Wolfe & Allen, 1973; Peterson et al,, 
1998). However, the ability to count all individuals in a defined area is a 
rare circumstance, but correction factors from a radio-marked sample can 
be used for determining a more accurate estimation of population size. 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations I 391 
Identification of individual animals 
While the opportunity to directly observe carnivores may be considered 
rare, there are certain species living in national parks or reserves with open 
habitats that allow for direct observation and identification of all individuals 
in the study area. This technique has been used successfully in studies of 
large carnivores in Africa. Biologists studying African lions have been able 
to identify all individuals by using sketches and photographs so that all 
lions found could be positively reidentified by a combination of ear notches, 
vibrissae spot patterns, and other natural features (Pennycuick & Rudnai, 
1970; Bretram, 1975; Hanby & Bygott, 1979). Similarly, identification of 
individual hyenas by distinct spot patterns, scars, and ear notches (East & 
Hofer, 1991) has been used to determine population size (Hofer & East, 
1995). Throat patches have been used to identify individual European otters 
(Watt, 1993). Individual coyotes in Yellowstone National Park were identifi- 
ed through radio collars, ear tags, and unique phenotypic characteristics. 
Observation of these animals permitted determination of pack size, and 
hence population size (Gese et al., 19gGa). Maddock & Mills (1993) cen- 
sused African wild dogs by collecting photographs from tourists and other 
field personnel. They were able to identify 357 wild dogs from 26 packs by 
examining over 5000 photographs. 
Common to studies using identification of individuals is relatively open 
habitat and a carnivore species that is readily observable and generally toler- 
ant of human presence. In fact, the animals do not necessarily need to be 
marked for individual identification, as individuals may be resighted and 
identified indirectly. Track characteristics of cougars has been used in 
which tracks of individual animals were separated on the basis of character- 
istics and location. These individual tracks were then combined to provide a 
density estimate (Koford, 1976; Ackerman et al., 1981; Van Dyke et al., 
1986; Smallwood & Fitzhugh, 1993). The main advantage of using charac- 
teristics of individual tracks for identification was that it entailed less effort 
than a large-scale trapping program, but the accuracy of this method in 
relation to changes in population size remains untested (Lindzey, 1987). 
While individual identification allows for a relatively complete count of ani- 
mals, the time and effort for this type of monitoring avails itself only to 
particular situations and is often conducted in conjunction with behavior 
studies (e.g., East & Hofer, 1991; Gese et al., 1gg6a). Another method that 
is receiving increasing attention is the use of hairsnares to acquire hair 
samples from carnivores, then using DNA sequencing to identify individ- 
uals in the population (Foran et al., 1gg7b; Paxinos et al., 1997; Kohn et al., 
1999). 


392 ( E. M. 
Gese 
Radiotelemetry 
With the introduction of radiotelemetry back in the ~gGos (Cochran & 
Lord, 1963), the ability to monitor secretive carnivores increased tremen- 
dously. This method allows researchers to estimate the home-range size or 
territory size of an animal. Combining territory size (and overlap) with the 
number of members of the social unit or pack, plus the percentage of radio- 
collared transients sampled from the population, density estimates can be 
derived for the population in question. Because canids tend to be highly 
social with well-defined territories, radiotelemetry is now widely accepted 
as a method to measure population size and density (e.g., Mech, 1g73a; 
Fritts & Mech, 1981; Fuller, 1989; Gese et a!., 1989). For more solitary 
carnivores, estimates of home-range size, the extent of inter- and in- 
trasexual home-range overlap, and the proportion of transients in the popu- 
lation are used to estimate population density. This method has been used 
for felids (Hornocker, 1970; Seidensticker et al., 1973; Hemker, 1982; 
Rolley, 1987; Quinn & Parker, 1987), mustelids (Melquist & Hornocker, 
1979; Hornocker & Hash, 1981; Magoun, 1985; Douglas & Strickland, 
1987; Strickland & Douglas, 1987)~ ringtails and coatis (Lanning, 1976; 
Trapp, 1978; Russell, 1979; Lacy, 1983), and bears (Kolenosky, 1987). While 
radiotelemetry is very labor intensive and costly, this technique provides 
one of the best and reliable estimates of population density for many carni- 
vores. Long-term studies using radiotelemetry provide the most reliable 
annual estimates of population density for several secretive, far-ranging, 
low-density carnivores, such as cougars (Hornocker, 1970; Seidensticker et 
al., 1973; Hemker, 1982), wolverine (Magoun, 1985), and lynx, Lynx lynx 
(Quinn & Parker, 1987). With the advent of satellite and GPS technology, 
more intensive monitoring of large and medium-sized carnivores will be 
possible (Ballard et al., 1998; Merrill et at., 1998), but systems for smaller 
carnivore species will require further technological development. 
MONITORING ANIMAL POPULATION DEMOGRAPHICS 
The previously described methodologies provide information on how a car- 
nivore population may be doing numerically, but do not necessarily answer 
questions of why the population trajectory is up, down, or stationary. In 
order to do this, one must know the rates of survival, fecundity, immigra- 
tion, and emigration that influences the persistence of a carnivore popula- 
tion. Thus, in this section I will attempt to summarize the important 
features that one may need to measure in order to understand these im- 
portant demographic processes. There are entire books devoted to the 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations I 393 
analysis of animal population dynamics (e.g., Caughley, 1977; Royama, 
1gg2), therefore I will not go into detail of the mathematics involved. Be- 
cause most of the actual techniques used to measure survival, fecundity, 
immigration, and emigration are species specific, for the scope of this chap- 
ter I will only provide a listing of the various measures one may want to 
monitor. I strongly recommend that readers embarking on a study of carni- 
vore population dynamics consult Caughley (1g77), Royama (1992)~ 
Thom- 
pson et al. (1998), and White & Garrott (1990) during the design and 
planning stages of studies so as to maximize their effort in collecting the 
proper data needed for demographic analyses. 
Fecundity 
The fecundity rate of a female is the number of offspring she produces over 
an interval of time (Caughley, 1977). Measuring fecundity or reproduction 
is fairly involved and time consuming. However, there are several basic 
questions dealing with fecundity that biologists may wish to ask: (I) when 
does the breeding season start and how long does it last, both in terms of 
estrous and gestation?; (2) when are the young born?; (3) what proportion of 
the females in the population breed?; (4) how many young are produced?; 
(5) is there one (monestrous) or multiple (polyestrous) breeding seasons in 
a year?; (6) what is the sex ratio at birth?; and (7) what is the age of first 
reproduction? There are various techniques to answer these questions. For 
carnivores, collection of carcasses, recovery of tagged animals, and observa- 
tions in the field or captivity may address some of the questions. More 
specifically, examination of ovaries (corpora lutea counts) and placental 
scar counts from recovered animals or hunter killed animals, the ratio of 
juveniles to females in harvest counts, and/or observation of litter size in 
the field will give some measure of reproductive output (e.g., age-specific 
fecundity). Behavioral observations of animals in the field or captivity, 
physical examination, or tissue histology may provide information on initi- 
ation and cessation of the breeding season, and age of first breeding or 
sexual maturity. 
Survival 
Measuring the survival rates of carnivores usually involves construction of a 
life table or estimation of survival from radiotelemetry data. Pertinent ques- 
tions a biologist may consider when designing a study to address survival 
rates are: (I) what is the number of deaths in each age interval?; (2) what 
is the probability of dying in each age interval?; (3) does mortality vary 
between seasons?; and (4) what are the causes of mortality? Ages from 


394 ( E. M. Gese 
animals collected from hunters and trappers can be used to construct life 
tables. Caughley (1977) presents detailed information on various models 
for life-table construction and survival analysis. Measuring radio-days and 
numbers of deaths during defined time intervals derived from radio-col- 
lared animals can be used to calculate daily and interval survival rates 
(Trent & Rongstad, 1974; Heisey & Fuller, 1985). Application and assump- 
tions of various survival estimators using radio-collared animals is covered 
thoroughly in White & Garrott (1990). Popular software programs that will 
estimate survival rates include SURVIV (White, 1983) and MICROMORT 
(Heisey & Fuller, 1985). The statistical package SAS (SAS Institute Inc.) 
will also calculate survival rates using the Kaplan-Meier product limit es- 
timator (White & Garrott, 1990). 
Immigration and emigration 
Measuring emigration and immigration from a carnivore population 
usually involves the capture and tagging of several individuals and the sub- 
sequent recapture or radio-tracking of those individuals. Monitoring of the 
movements of animals out of a marked population (e.g., dispersal) is a 
simpler task that monitoring movements into the population, because 
biologists can not predict where immigration will occur from outside the 
known study population. Thus, biologists typically assume that the rate of 
movement out (egress) of their study area is equal to the rate of ingress. 
This assumption is usually violated, particularly if one of the populations is 
receiving control or some form of management. Whether the population 
being studied is maintained as a source or sink is pertinent to understand- 
ing the system and carnivore population in question. 
DISEASE MONITORING 
A subject often overlooked when monitoring carnivores is the question per- 
taining to the role of diseases in population dynamics. With an increasing 
interface between carnivores and humans and their pets, livestock, and 
expanding development, the possibility of disease transmission continues 
to escalate. Rare or endangered carnivores exposed to disease agents can 
have dire consequences. Canine distemper caused a rapid decline in black- 
footed ferret numbers and almost caused the species to become extinct 
(Williams et a!., 1988). Similarly, rabies has been implicated in the decline 
of African wild dogs (Woodroffe SE Ginsberg, 1gg7b). Biologists beginning 
a study should investigate the possible need for a disease monitoring pro- 


Monitoring of terrestrial carnivore populations I 395 
gram and handling protocol (for animals and samples collected), especially 
if dealing with a plan to reintroduce a species, or a rapidly declining carni- 
vore population. Physical examination of living animals, blood collection 
for serological analysis, and post-mortem examinations of animals col- 
lected from trappers or hunters and recovery of telemetered animals can be 
used in a disease monitoring program. Consultations with wildlife veterin- 
arians affiliated to a diagnostic lab or university are recommended to recog- 
nize which diseases should be screened for and then design an appropriate 
monitoring program. 
MODELS 
Computer simulations have been used to model carnivore population dy- 
namics. Models which take into account different levels or rates of demo- 
graphic variables, such as survival, fecundity, age structure, etc. have been 
used to develop computer simulations of population trends of various car- 
nivore species, including coyotes (Connolly, 1978; Sterling et al., 1983), 
river otters (Tabor & Wight, 1977; Mowbray et al., 1979). polar bears (Stirl- 
ing et al., 1976), and black bears (Lindzey 6 Meslow, 1980). These models 
can then be used to simulate the population response when one or more 
demographic variables is manipulated. The use of simple population 
models has now expanded into more sophisticated models and software 
programs (e.g., VORTEX by Lacy, 1gg3b). Population viability analysis 
(PVA) and population and habitat viability assessment (PHVA) has been 
used to evaluate the outcomes of various management actions, environ- 
mental perturbations, and stochastic events on the population viability of a 
species over a predetermined period of time (Shaffer, 1981; Boyce, 1992; 
Reed et al., 1998) using life-history data in relation to environmental factors 
(e.g., Shaffer, 1983). Biologists using these models should consider the 
'realism' of these models. A PVA or PHVA is only a model and may not 
actually reflect or predict population persistence, and thus should not be 
the primary tool for developing a conservation plan. Macdonald et al. 
(1998a) recommended that PVAs appear to be most useful to biologists by 
guiding management actions and identifying practical monitoring 
methods. The accuracy of the data inputted into the model, levels of uncer- 
tainty, as well as the sensitivity of the model should be evaluated (Reed et 
al., 1998). Some PVAs and PHVAs may actually be best used to raise ques- 
tions and formulate hypotheses for future testing (Macdonald et al., 1gg8a; 
Reed et al., 1998). 


396 ( E. M. 
Gese 
SUMMARY 
In closing, as with all of the techniques mentioned above, personnel utiliz- 
ing these methodologies should seriously consider what questions need to 
be answered before starting a monitoring program. Careful thought and 
planning will save headaches down the road. Logistical, political, ethical, 
social, and economic considerations should be included in the planning 
process, Noninvasive techniques are becoming more prevalent for monitor- 
ing carnivore populations and will continue to be important for monitoring 
rare, threatened, and endangered species, particularly when capture and 
handling could jeopardize the health and welfare of a species. I encourage 
anyone planning to initiate a monitoring program to talk to other re- 
searchers and gain their insight into what works and what does not work. 
Regrettably, techniques that fail are usually not published. Often times, 
field personnel have valuable knowledge about particular aspects of carni- 
vore monitoring that are not readily available in the published literature. 
Acknowledgements 
I greatly appreciate the helpful reviews of the manuscript by Ann Kitchen, 
Fred Knowlton, Russ Mason, and four anonymous reviewers, plus input 
and discussions with my graduate students and colleagues. 


Published in Carnivore Conservation, edited by 
John L. Gittleman, Stephan M. Funk, David W. 
MacDonald, and Robert K. Wayne. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press & The Zoological 
Society of London, 2001. Pages 372–396. 
 
 
