--- 
source: 2007 000n-9.pdf
--- 

BREEDING OF OTTERS (LUTRA LUTRA L.) IN THE WILD IN THE MEDITERRANEAN 
AREA 
 
Jordi RUIZ-OLMO, Francesc MAÑAS AND Antoni BATET 
 
Departament de Medi Ambient i Habitatge, Generalitat de Catalunya, Dr. Roux 80, 08017 – Barcelona, Spain. 
email: ajruiol@gencat.net 
 
 
Abstract.  We update our knowledge on otter breeding in the Iberian Mediterranean habitats: detailing size of 
litters (embryos, small and large cubs), seasonal breeding patterns, habitat for rearing cubs  and pre-dispersal 
findings.  We show the effect of temporal variation of the resources (both food and water availability), providing 
information about some suspected key species for otter breeding (barbels, eel, corkwing and American crayfish). 
 
Key words: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, otter, cubs, breeding, Mediterranean habitats, prey 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Otters (Lutra lutra) are a semi-aquatic species, whose life is closely related to water.  This is 
especially true in the case of diet, which is largely made up of aquatic and semi-aquatic 
species (CHANIN, 1985; MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; KRUUK, 1995; RUIZ-OLMO AND 
PALAZÓN, 1997).  Fish, crayfish, and amphibians are the most common prey, although, in 
Mediterranean habitats, water snakes, insects, birds and small mammals are also common 
items in the diet (ADRIAN AND DELIBES, 1987; RUIZ-OLMO, 1995; RUIZ-OLMO AND PALAZÓN, 
1997; BARTOLOMÉ, 2000; CLAVERO ET AL., 2003).  
Studies of otter breeding behaviour have been carried out mainly in wet, colder and 
even snowy habitats, such as Britain, Scandinavia, and central and north eastern Europe 
(STEPHENS, 1957; ERLINGE, 1967; STUBBE, 1969, 1989; WIJNGAARDEN AND PEPPEL, 1970; 
REUTHER, 1980; CHANIN, 1985; MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; KRUUK, CONROY AND 
MOORHOUSE ET AL., 1987; HEGGBERGET, 1988; JORGA, STUBBE AND ZINKE, 1989; RÖBIN, 
1989; DE SILVA, 1991; SIDOROVICH, 1991, 1997; SIDOROVICH AND TUMANOV, 1994; KRUUK, 
1995; HEGGBERGET, 1993; HEGGBERGET AND CHRISTENSEN, 1996; ANSORGE, ZINKE AND 
ZINKE, 1997; DÜLFER AND ROCHE, 1998; ELMEROS AND MADSEN, 1999; HAUER, ANSORGE 
AND  ZINKE , 2002; CONROY AND BACON, 2005).  Following these studies, the Eurasian otter 
(Lutra lutra) is confirmed as a polyoestrous species, with litters of 1-5 cubs (more often 1-3).   
Otters normally breed between spring and early autumn, but some studies have reported otters 
breeding throughout the year often with seasonal variations, while others have shown 
breeding to be predominately during the winter months (CONROY AND BACON, 2005)  
Mediterranean habitats are a special situation for semi-aquatic species such as the 
otter, because, in these regions, there are large fluctuations and shortages in water and feeding 
resources, affecting deeply the ecology and behaviour of the species (JIMÉNEZ AND LACOMBA, 
1991; RUIZ-OLMO AND PALAZÓN, 1997; RUIZ-OLMO AND DELIBES, 1998; RUIZ-OLMO, LÓPEZ-
MARTÍN AND PALAZÓN 2001b; RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2001a, 2002; PRENDA ET AL., 2001; 
CLAVERO ET AL, 2003; RUIZ-OLMO, 2001, 2004; JIMÉNEZ AND RUIZ-OLMO, in press). Otters 
are food-limited species (KRUUK AND CARSS, 1996; RUIZ-OLMO, LÓPEZ-MARTÍN AND 
PALAZÓN, 2001b), because of their high metabolic needs, breeding patterns, heat losses and 
lifestyle (IVERSEN, 1972; GITTLEMAN AND OFTEDAL, 1987; OFTEDAL AND GITTLEMAN, 1989; 
MCNAAB, 1989; NOLET AND KRUUK, 1994; KRUUK, 1995), so large fluctuations in resources 
may be a handicap during breeding time, otters being pressed to adapt to a more efficient way 
of life (HEGGBERGET, 1993; KRUUK, 1995).  


However, most of these studies deal with the biology of the species, and very few 
with the recruitment, pre-dispersal and dispersal stages, or the habitat selection for breeding 
or cub rearing (JENKINS, 1980; HARPER, 1981; KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE, 1991; 
KRUUK, 1995; SIDOROVICH, 1997). 
The only published works on otter breeding in the Mediterranean habitats were 
carried out in the Iberian Peninsula (RUIZ-OLMO, 1994, 1998; BEJA, 1995, 1996; RUIZ-OLMO 
ET AL., 2001b, 2002, in press a & b).  It is of interest to study the different prey species of 
otters living in such habitats, with low water availability. This paper updates the information 
from these studies, in view of the importance of such resource changes, and identifies future 
research needs.  
 
 
2   DEFINITIONS  
 
To understand more fully the results discussed below, the following definitions are used 
(RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002, in press b): 
 
• 
Cubs in den. Cubs between birth and when they begin to leave their dens. 
• 
Small cubs. Individuals, approximately 2-3 to six months old (the period at which they 
begin to leave the den, to when it is difficult to distinguish them from adult otters 
(mainly the mother) [when they reach 90% of their total length (TL) in the Iberian 
Peninsula].  
• 
Large cubs. Over about six months old up to the time of dispersal (which often occurs 
between eight and 16 months).  Similar size to mothers, with higher walking, escaping 
and foraging capacities. 
• 
Rearing cubs’ sector. Is a special stretch or patch selected by females with litters in 
which they find a quality habitat, to ensure low cub mortality and easier dispersal of 
young?  
 
3   SIZE OF LITTERS AND FEEDING HABITS  
 
RUIZ-OLMO (1994) found an average of 2.0 embryos/female (SD = 0), from a very small 
sample of Spanish otters (n=5).  However, unpublished new data (J. RUIZ-OLMO AND F. 
MAÑAS, unpublished data) shows an average of 2.06 embryos for 18 Spanish females (SD = 
0.54; range 1 – 3), 72% of litters being of two embryos.  This is a smaller litter size compared 
with other studies carried out in Europe in other freshwater habitats (HAUER, ANSORGE AND 
ZINKE, 2002; CONROY AND BACON, 2005), ranging from 2.3 to 2.9, but similar to coastal 
Atlantic otters (ranging from 1.7 to 2.2). Explanations for this may vary, but the smaller size 
of Iberian otters (RUIZ-OLMO, DELIBES AND ZAPATA, 1998), the relative proportion of young 
and old females in population, proved to have smaller litters (HAUER, ANSORGE AND ZINKE, 
2002), and the wide fluctuations and unpredictability in water and food availability (RUIZ-
OLMO ET AL., 2002) could contribute to this smaller litter size. 
Mean small cubs litter sizes for the different Iberian otter populations range from 1.1 
to 2.9 (Table 1) and are within the range described in other countries (Table 1) (CHANIN, 
1985; MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; DE SILVA, 1991; SIDOROVICH, 1991; KRUUK, 1995; 
ANSORGE, ZINKE AND ZINKE, 1997; DÜLFER AND ROCHE, 1998; ELMEROS AND MADSEN, 1999; 
HAUER, ANSORGE AND ZINKE, 2002). 
 
 


Table 1: Breeding patterns of otters (litters of small cubs outside dens) in some Iberian Mediterranean habitats, in relation to variations in food resources. 
 
 
Area 
Type 
Habitat 
Mean 
altitude 
(m) 
Number of 
prey 
species 
over 5 % 
in diet 
Average 
cubs/litter 
(n) 
Breeding 
pattern 
Main births 
time 
 
Main 
estimated 
time to live 
in den 
Maximal food 
abundance 
time 
Main species in 
habitat and otter 
diet 
Coast 
Marine 
0 
5 
1.73 
(11) 
Seasonal 
X – XII 
 
XII – III 
XII – III 
corkwing wrasse 
(Symphodus melops)
 
South west 
Portugala 
 
Inland 
Lowland 
Mediterranean 
rivers and streams 
0 – 100 
5 
2.86 
(7) 
Seasonal 
I – III 
III – VI 
III - VII 
eel (Anguilla 
anguilla) 
Inland. High 
Pyrenees 
Altitude 
oligotrophic 
streams 
700 - 1100
1 
1.12 
(8) 
 
Non 
seasonal 
(Small 
sample) 
All around year 
(Small sample) 
All around 
year 
(Small 
sample) 
- 
brown trout (Salmo 
trutta) 
Inland. Prepyrenean 
rivers.  
Eating fish  
Mountain 
Mediterranean 
rivers 
350 – 700 
2 – 3 
1.57 
(49) 
V – IX 
Ebro’s barbel 
(Barbus graellsii) 
Inland. Prepyrenean 
rivers.  
Eating fish and 
crayfish  
Mountain 
Mediterranean 
rivers 
200 – 400 
3 – 6 
2.40 
(5) 
 
Seasonal 
 
III – VI 
 
V - IX 
V – IX 
American crayfish 
(Procambarus 
clarckii) and 
cyprinids 
Inland. 
Mediterranean 
rivers.  
Eating fish  
Mediterranean 
rivers 
200 – 600 
2 – 4 
1.85 
(13) 
Spring - 
Summer 
Ebro’s Barbel and 
ase (Chondrostoma 
miegii) 
Inland. 
Mediterranean 
rivers.  
Eating fish and 
crayfish  
Mediterranean 
rivers 
200 – 500 
3 – 5 
1.60 
(5) 
Seasonal 
 
XII – II for dry 
years  
 
XII – IX for 
normal years 
 
III - XII 
V – IX 
American crayfish 
and Cyprinids 
 
North east 
Spain. 
Ebro basinb, c 
Inland. 
Mediterranean 
lowland rivers and 
wetlands 
Lowland 
Mediterranean 
rivers, streams and 
wetlands 
 
0 – 100 
> 5 
1.50 
(4) 
Small 
sample 
Small sample 
Small sample
Small sample 
American crayfish, 
eel and cyprinids 
 
(a) 
BEJA (1995, 1996); (b) RUIZ-OLMO AND PALAZÓN  (1997), RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2001, 2002); (c) Catalonia, eastern Aragón and northern Castelló. 
 
 
 


Breeding success (small cub litter size) was connected to prey quality and abundance (Figure 
1 and RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002), and for this reason with altitude (Figure 2), because of a 
decline in fish availability (biomass and numbers) and prey community diversity (RUIZ-
OLMO, 1998).  The highest values were found in areas where food diversity was higher 
(consisting of several fish species and crayfish (Table 1).  In comparison, the smallest litters 
were found in areas where the diet was almost monospecific (brown trout) and food 
availability lower due to altitude (RUIZ-OLMO, 1998).  However, it is also true that in some 
areas of the Mediterranean, e.g., the rivers of the Ebro basin, where the otter’s diet diversity 
was high (based on fish and crayfish, which at certain times can be highly abundant), litters 
were smaller than in other areas with similar diet.  In such cases, the effect of drought appears 
to be the most important factor in explaining this.  The availability (and biomass) of the main 
sources of prey is affected by the lack of water, just at the time when they, the prey species, 
should be most abundant (BEJA, 1995; RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002, in press c).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 1: Relationship between the size of small cub litters and the variety of the otter diet (number of main 
species in diet, over 5%) in the Iberian peninsula (freshwater and marine habitats), including only localities with 
sufficient sample size. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Relationship between the size of small cub litters and  altitude for freshwater habitats of the Iberian 
Peninsula (including only localities with sufficient sample size). 
 
y = 1,9511x - 0,5169
R = 0,77; P = 0.016
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
Litter size (small cubs / female)
Main prey species (> 5%) 
y = -354,29x + 1064,8
R = 0,85; P = 0.015
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0,8
1,3
1,8
2,3
2,8
Litter size (small cubs / female)
Altitude (m)


 
4   SEASONAL BREEDING PATTERNS AND RESOURCES 
 
From a general view, L. lutra was capable of breeding throughout the year in the Iberian 
Peninsula but, locally, breeding was seasonal (Table 1).  Birth distribution patterns of otters 
corresponded also to variations in abundance of food resources in space and time (Table 1), as 
previously reported in northern Europe (KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE, 1987; 
HEGGBERGET, 1993; HEGGBERGET AND CHRISTENSEN, 1994; KRUUK, 1995; ELMEROS AND 
MADSEN, 1999; CONROY AND BACON, 2005).  The emergence of cubs outside the dens, at 2-3 
months old, coincided with peaks of biomass of main species in the environment.  Even if the 
regulating-species were different in each case (Table 2) and the temporal pattern changed in 
these different areas, the availability of food resources when the cubs were 2-3 months old, 
seemed to be particularly important for their survival and breeding patterns, as suggested by 
HEGGBERGET, (1993) in Norway and KRUUK (1995) in Shetland.  At about this age, cubs 
begin to venture out of the dens, start to take solid food, and increase their energy needs 
through movement (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; HEGGBERGET, 1993; DURBIN 1996; 
KRUUK, 1995).  HEGGBERGET, (1993) suggests a mechanism based on the polyoestrous 
pattern of otter breeding.  The ability of the otter to be ready to breed throughout the whole 
year, but synchronising births with maximum food availability, is a good strategy for reducing 
the risk of mistaking the time of greatest energy need and losing the litter in a highly 
unpredictable setting (NEGUS AND BERGER 1987; PHILIPPI AND SEGER 1989; HEGGBERGET, 
1993).  
 
 
5   HABITAT FOR REARING CUBS AS A LIMITING FACTOR 
 
RUIZ-OLMO ET AL (2001b) showed, a narrow relationship between the number of litters using 
a stretch of water and the fish abundance in such areas for a number of rivers in north east 
Spain.  This relationship was also true for the number of cubs present at each stretch. In both 
cases, an asymptotic value was found of 3-5 cubs or two litters per 10-12 kilometres stretch of 
water.  So, again otters seemed to be food-limited (KRUUK AND CARSS, 1996), but other 
complimentary causes may also affect the use of resources. Behavioural avoidance seems to 
be the complimentary suitable explanation for this.  So ‘good habitat’ for rearing litters 
appears to be an important ‘property’, excluding other litters for competition for feeding or 
other resources.  
Some studies have been carried out in north eastern Spain to describe and study such 
kinds of ‘good habitats’. RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (in press a) have shown how females rearing 
small cubs selected special stretches of water:  the deepest, with more pools and calm waters, 
a greater abundance of food and a greater availability of potential and complex dens.  So, 
during this period of breeding, females have selected patches with abundant food (decreasing 
the foraging time needs and probably the home range size), shelter and cover (to reduce 
danger of predation), water abundance (to avoid effects of droughts and it is easier for them to 
learn to swim) and with less danger of cubs dying because floods.  In other words, trying to 
ensure the cubs’ survival and declining the mortality rate.  RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (in press b) 
demonstrated a low mortality rate during this time, when using rich small patches, both for 
small and large cubs. 
But patches to rear small cubs (and also large cubs) can be a limiting factor (RUIZ-
OLMO ET AL., in press a), so females must actively look for such habitat. 
 
 


Table 2: Characteristics of the key species controlling otter breeding in some areas of the Iberian Peninsula. 
 
 
Area 
Habitat 
Key species controlling 
breeding 
Abundance in diet (%) 
during peaks 
Average weight in 
studied areas  
(g) 
Maximum weight in 
study areas (g) 
Calorific value 
(kJ/g wet 
weight) d 
 
% of the key species in 
the fish community 
(except for crayfish) at 
2 month old cubs time 
Abundance in patches 
at 2 moth old cubs 
period 
 
Coastal 
Corkwing wrasse 
(Symphodus melops) a 
57  
(biomass) 
51.0 
? 
? 
81.2 % 
(angled) 
20 – 25 catch.hour-1.day-
1 
 
South 
west 
Portugal
a 
 
Lowland 
Mediterranean 
rivers and streams 
Eel  
(Anguilla anguilla) a 
40 – 50 
(energetic value) 
10 – 20 
 (prey –items) 
20.5 
2.500  
(up to 10.000) 
5.06 – 6.08 
27.5 % 
(biomass) 
 
3 – 5 g.m-2 
High Pyrenees 
Brown trout  
(Salmo trutta) b, c 
67.2 – 100 
(prey-items) 
50-150 
2.000 
5.82 – 6.02 
98 - 100 % 
 
Ebro’s barbel  
(Barbus graellsii) b, c 
53.7 – 76  
(prey-items) 
53 – 259 
2.500 
5.38 +- 1.08 
54 - 99 %  
(biomass) 
 
North 
east 
Spain. 
Ebro 
basinb, c 
 
 
Prepyrenean and 
Mediterranean 
rivers.  
American crayfish 
(Procambarus clarckii) a, 
b, c 
37.5 – 58. 7 
(prey-items) 
5 – 30 
70 
3.99 –4.1 
? 
>15 catch.hour-1.day-1 
 
(a) BEJA (1995, 1996); (b) RUIZ-OLMO AND  PALAZÓN  (1997),  (c ) RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2001, 2002) , (d) NORMAN (1963), ELLIOT (1976), CUMMING AND WUYCHECK (1979), NELSON AND& 
KRUUK (1997), BEJA (1995), RUIZ-OLMO, SANTIPALLI AND BLASCO (Unpublished data)   
 
 


6   AREAS FOR PRE-DISPERSAL CUBS: REDUCING MORTALITY 
 
Recently RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (in press b) found that females with large cubs from the Spanish 
Pyrenees, were also selecting special rich patches for food and shelter and largely reducing 
the home range size.  As a result of this, mortality rate during the pre-dispersal time was 
especially low.  Large cub litters from rivers Noguera Ribagorçana and Noguera Pallaresa 
(Lleida) were found more often than expected at the heads of reservoirs (very rich in prey 
during fish migrations and spawning), river complex sections (meanders and islands), wider 
stretches, rough waters, areas with caves and rocky holt systems. Small cub litters were 
detected more often at narrow stretches and calm (less than 0.5 m3/sec) waters.  
The ability of females to find and select such patches could be of significant 
importance in our understanding of otter breeding in different habitats.  Part of our current 
research is focusing on these areas because this is not an unusual situation. From a total of 27 
north eastern Spain large cub litters detected in recent years, 33.3 % were found at the heads 
of a reservoir, despite this being a very rare habitat (RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., in press b).  
Considering only large litters from the Pyrenees (n=17), this percentage rises to 47.1 %, all 
the remaining litters being observed at rivers.  Such results confirm the general importance of 
these types of areas.  However, large cub litters could select other attributes in other 
conditions, for example natural rivers or streams, lakes, marshes or marine habitats.  
Description, location and conservation of such patches are essential tasks. Presently, 
RAFAEL ROMERO (personal communication) is carrying out his PhD on coastal otters of 
Galicia (north west Spain), where large litters also seem to use a similar kind area in coastal 
lagoons for pre-dispersal large cubs. 
 
 
7   KEY PREY SPECIES FOR BREEDING 
 
As with seasonal breeding, RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2002) has shown the importance of certain 
prey species in the regulation of breeding success, habitat use and selection, and otter 
abundance. Large Iberian barbels (genus Barbus) [in north east Spain, mainly Barbus 
graellsii], particularly migrating reproductive fish appear to be the main factor regulating 
otter breeding in most of the stable rivers of the Iberian Peninsula (Tables 1 and 2).  These are 
medium-sized fish (average body mass of reproductive B. graellsii ranging for example from 
53 to 259 grams but often reaching more than two kilogrammes; being very abundant at the 
time of otter breeding, when they are also easy to catch (Table 2).  So the abundance and 
availability of the species could possibly be responsible, at least in part, for controlling otter 
breeding.  However, this is a fish which is badly affected by droughts and this may also be 
responsible for the problems that otters have in breeding during the droughts of spring and 
summer (RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2001b, 2002). 
The Iberian Peninsula is a large and diverse region, so we can find other key prey 
species with a similar role (Table 2).  The most widespread is the American crayfish 
(Procambarus clarckii), sharing habitat with the precedent fish.  This is a smaller prey 
species, but with a very high availability in many patches (BEJA, 1995, RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 
2002).  It is a new invasive species which is probably occupying the niche of the native now-
endangered crayfish species (Austrapotamobius pallipes), which was formerly a main species 
in otter diet (CALLEJO, 1998; RUIZ-OLMO AND PALAZÓN, 1997).  Perhaps this was also the 
case of the eel (Anguilla anguilla), now restricted to low altitude rivers and streams, 
downstream of dams.  This was the controlling species in streams of south west Portugal, and 
seems also to be one of the main factors controlling the breeding of otters in the lowlands of 
other parts of Portugal, south west Andalusia, Galicia, Asturias, and Cantabria, according also 


to its importance in the otter diet in such regions (CALLEJO, 1994; GOMES, 1998; CLAVERO ET 
AL., 2003; MÓNICA RODRÍGUEZ, personal communication).  The dramatic decline of salmon 
and sea trout has also had a significant influence on this. 
Finally, BEJA (1995, 1996) identified the importance of the corkwing wrasse 
(Symphodus melops) for breeding of coastal Atlantic otters, as KRUUK (1995) demonstrated 
with eelpout (Zoarces viviparus) and rocklings (Ciliata) in Shetland.  Such small fish (BEJA, 
1995) seemed to be the more favoured in these habitats, being again the most common and 
abundant, with the exception of the different eel species.  However, very little is known about 
temporal changes and substitute species during shortages of the controlling species. 
 
8   FUTURE LINES OF RESEARCH  
 
The pattern of otter breeding in the Mediterranean countries follows a similar pattern to 
elsewhere in Europe, with food availability being a main factor regulating this. However, the 
main differences are related to water limitation, and the shortages originating from this.  More 
research is needed in order to define accurately the actual mechanisms and energetic balance 
of breeding.  Also the role of fluctuations and inter-annual changes should be studied.  
Finally, the study of natal and cub rearing areas must be undertaken because of its importance 
in the design of conservation areas.   
 
9   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
We are grateful for the help of Victòria Asensio, Juan Jiménez, José María López-Martín, 
Diego Martínez, Antoni Margalida, Josep Maria Olmo-Vidal and Santiago Palazón. Jim 
Conroy helped to make the manuscript more understandable. 
 
 
10   REFERENCES  
 
ADRIAN, M.I. & DELIBES, M. 1987. Food habits of the otter (Lutra lutra) in two habitats of the Doñana National 
Park, south west Spain. Journal of Zoology, London, 212: 399-406. 
ANSORGE, H., ZINKE , R. & ZINKE, O. 1997. Population structure of otters, Lutra lutra. Parameters and model 
for a Central European region. Zeitschrift für Säugetierkunde, 62: 143-151.  
BARTOLOMÉ, M.A. 2000. Alimentación de la Nutria (Lutra lutra) en el río Bergantes (Castellón). Dugastella, 1: 
35-42. 
BEJA, P.R. 1995. Patterns of Availability and use of Resources by Otters (Lutra lutra L.) in south west Portugal. 
Ph.D. Thesis. University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen. 
BEJA, P.R. 1996. Temporal and spatial patterns of rest-site use by four female otters Lutra lutra along the south 
west coast of Portugal. Journal of Zoology, London, 239: 741-753. 
CALLEJO, A. 1994. Ecología Trófica de la Nutria (Lutra lutra L.) en Aguas Continentales de Galícia y de la 
Meseta Norte. Ph.D. Thesis. University of Santiago, Santiago de Compostela. 
CHANIN, P. R F.  1985. The Natural History of Otters. Croom Helm, London. 
CLAVERO, M., PRENDA, J., BLANCO, P., REBOLLO, A., VALLE, J., NARVÁEZ, M., BARRIOS, L. & DELIBES,   
M.  2003. Tesoros naturales de los ríos del Campo de Gibraltar. Quercus, 193: 14-19.  
CONROY, J.W.H. & BACON, P.J. 2005. Seasonal breeding in Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) with specific 
reference to Scotland. (In: The Return of the Otter in Europe – where and how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye 
30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  
International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye.    
CUMMINS, K.W., & WUYCHECK, J.C. 1971. Caloric equivalents for investigations in ecological energetics. 
Mitteilung Internationale Vereinigung fur Theoretische und Angewandte Limnologie, 18: 1-158. 
DE SILVA, P.K. 1991. Aspects of Behaviour and Ecology of Old World Otters. A review. In:  Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited by Reuther, C & Röchert, R.) Habitat, 6: 95-
106. 


DULFER, R. & ROCHE, K. 1998. First Phase Report of the Trebon Otter Project. Council of Europe.  Nature 
and Environment, 93: 1-142. 
DURBIN, L.S. 1996. Some changes in the habitat use of a free-ranging female otter Lutra lutra during breeding. 
Journal of Zoology, London, 240: 761-810. 
ELMEROS, M. & MADSEN, A.B. 1999. On the reproduction biology of otters (Lutra lutra) from Denmark. 
Zeitschrift für Säugetierkunde, 64: 193-200.  
ERLINGE, S. 1967. Home range of the otter Lutra lutra L. in southern Sweden. Oikos,18: 186- 209. 
GITTLEMAN, J.L. & OFTEDAL, O.T. 1987. Comparative growth and lactation energetics in carnivores.  
Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, 57: 41-77. 
GOMES, N.,  1998. Distribuçao e Ecologia Trófica da Contra (Lutra lutra) na Ria de Aveiro. Mestrado Thesis. 
University of Porto, Porto. 
HARPER, R. 1981   Sites of three otter (Lutra lutra) breeding holts in freshwater habitats. Journal of Zoology, 
London, 195: 554-556. 
HAUER, S., ANSORGE, H. & ZINKE, O. 2002. Reproductive performance of otters Lutra lutra (Linnaeus, 1758) 
in Eastern Germany: low reproduction in a long-term strategy. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 77: 
329-340. 
HEGGBERGET, T.M. 1988. Reproduction in the female European otter in central and northern Norway.  Journal 
of Mammalogy, 69: 169-167. 
HEGGBERGET, T.M. 1993. Reproductive Strategy and Feeding Ecology of the Eurasian Otter Lutra lutra. Dr.Sc. 
Thesis. University of Trondheim, Trondheim. 
HEGGBERGET, T.E., & CHRISTENSEN, H. 1996. Reproductive timing in Eurasian otters on the coast of Norway. 
Ecography, 17: 339-348.  
IVERSEN, J.A. 1972. Basal energy metabolism of mustelids. Journal of Comparative Physiology, 81:  341-344. 
JENKINS, D. 1980. Ecology of otters in northern Scotland. I. Otter (Lutra lutra) breeding and dispersion in mid 
Deeside, Aberdeenshire in 1974-79. Journal of Animal Ecology, 49: 713-735. 
JIMÉNEZ, J. & LACOMBA, I. 1991. The influence of water demands on otter (Lutra lutra) distribution in 
Mediterranean Spain. . In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited 
by Reuther, C & Röchert, R.) Habitat, 6: 249-255.  
JIMÉNEZ, J. & RUIZ-OLMO, J.  in press. Assessing linear home ranges and movements in the Euroasiatic otter 
(Lutra lutra), influence of sex, age and methods: a case study in Mediterranean rivers. Journal of Mammalogy. 
JORGA, W., STUBBE, A., & ZINKE, R. 1989. Beiträge zur Reproduktion und Aktivität des Fischotters Lutra lutra 
(L., 1758) im Tiergarten Hoyerswerda und im Lausitzer Teichgebiet. Populationsökologie Marderartiger 
Säugetiere,1: 155-180. 
KRUUK, H. 1995. Wild Otters. Predation and Populations. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
KRUUK, H., & CARSS, D.N. 1996. Costs and benefits of fishing by semi-aquatic carnivore, the otter Lutra lutra. 
In: Aquatic Predators and their Prey. (Edited by Greenstreet, S.P.R. and Tasker, M.L.) Pp. 10-16. Fishing News 
Books, Oxford. 
KRUUK, H., CONROY, J.W.H. & MOORHOUSE, A. 1987. Seasonal reproduction, mortality and food of otters 
(Lutra lutra L.) in Shetland. Symposia of the. Zoological  Society of London,  58: 263-278. 
MCNAB, B.K. 1989. Basal rate metabolism, body size, and food habits in the Order Carnivora. In:  Carnivore 
Behaviour, Ecology, and Evolution. (Edited by Gittleman, J.L.) Pp. 335-254. Chapman and Hall, London. 
MASON, C.F. & MACDONALD, S.M. 1986. Otters. Ecology and Conservation. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge.  
NELSON, K. & KRUUK, H. 1997. The prey of otters: calorific content of eels (Anguilla anguilla) and other fish, 
frogs (Rana temporaria) and toads (Bufo bufo). IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 14:  75-80. 
NEGUS, N.C. & BERGER, P.J. 1987. Mammalian reproductive physiology. Adaptive responses to changing 
environments. Current Mammalogy, 1: 149-173.  
NOLET, B.A. & KRUUK, H. 1994. Hunting yield and daily food intake of a lactating otter (Lutra lutra) in 
Shetland. Journal of Zoology, London, 233: 326-331. 
NORMAN, J.R. 1963. A History of Fishes. Ernest Benn Ltd., London. 
OFTEDAL, O.T. & GITTLEMAN, J.L. 1989. Patterns of energy output during reproduction in Carnivores. In: 
Carnivore Behaviour, Ecology, and Evolution. (Edited by Gittlemann J.L.) Pp.355-368. Chapman and Hall, 
London. 
PHILIPPI, T. & SEGER, J. 1989. Hedging one’s evolutionary bets, revisited. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 4: 
41-44. 
PRENDA, J., LÓPEZ-NIEVES, P. &  BRAVO, R. 2001. Conservation of otter Lutra lutra in a Mediterranean area: 
the importance of habitat quality and temporal variation in water availability. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and 
Freshwater Ecosystems, 11: 343-355. 
REUTHER, C. 1980. Der Fischotter, Lutra lutra L. in Niedersachsen. Naturische. Landschein Niedersachsen, 
11:1-182.  


RÖBIN, K. 1989. Haltung und Zucht des Fischotters Lutra lutra in Zoologischen Gärten: Ein Überblick. 
Populationsökologie Marderartiger Säugetiere, 1: 181-192. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J. 1994. Reproducción y observación de grupos de nutria (Lutra lutra L.) en el Norte de España. 
Miscellania Zoologica. 17: 225-229.  
RUIZ-OLMO, J. 1995. Estudio Bionómico sobre la Nutria(Lutra lutra L., 1758) en Aguas Continentales de la 
Península Ibérica. Ph.D. Thesis. University of  Barcelona, Barcelona. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J.  1998. Influence of altitude on the distribution, abundance and ecology of the otter (Lutra lutra). 
In: Behaviour and Ecology of Riparian Mammals. (Edited by Dunstone, N. and Gorman, M.) Symposia of the 
Zoological Society of London, 71: 159-176. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J. 2001. Pla de Conservació de la Llúdriga a Catalunya: Biologia i conservació. Generalitat de 
Catalunya, Departament de Medi Ambient, Documents dels Quaderns del Medi Ambient, 6: 1-87. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J. 2005.  Otters in the Mediterranean countries. (In: The Return of the Otter in Europe – where and 
how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of  Skye 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, 
A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye.    
RUIZ-OLMO, J. & DELIBES, M. 1998. La Nutria en España ante el Horizonte del Año 2000. Sociedad Española 
para la Conservación y el Estudio de los Mamíferos, Málaga. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., DELIBES, M. & ZAPATA, S.C. 1998. External morphometry, demography and mortality of the 
otter Lutra lutra (Linneo, 1758) in the Iberian Peninsula. Galemys, 10 (número especial): 239-251. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., BATET, A., JIMÉNEZ, J. & MARTÍNEZ, D. in press a. Habitat selection of females and small 
cubs of Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra L.) in south western European Mediterranean freshwater habitats. Lutra, 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., MARGALIDA, A. & BATET, A. in press b. Use of small rich patches by Eurasian otter (Lutra   
lutra L.) females and cubs during the pre-dispersal period. Journal of Zoology, London 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., JIMÉNEZ, J., CHACÓN, W. & MARTINÍNEZ, D. in press c. The importance of ponds for the otter 
(Lutra lutra) during droughts periods in Mediterranean ecosystems: A case study in Bergantes river. Aquatic 
Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J. , JIMÉNEZ, J.,  PALAZÓN, S.  & LÓPEZ-MARTÍN, J.M. 2001a. Ecologie et conservation de la 
loutre (Lutra lutra) et du vison d’Europe (Mustela lutreola) aux milieux Mediterranèes. In: L’Etude et la 
Conservation des Carnivores. (Edited by Chapron, G. and Moutou, F.) Pp. 104-112. Société Française pour 
l’Étude et la Protection des Mammifères: Paris.  
RUIZ-OLMO, J., LÓPEZ-MARTÍN, J.M. & PALAZÓN, S. 2001b. The influence of fish abundance on the otter 
(Lutra lutra) populations in Iberian Mediterranean habitats. Journal of Zoology, London, 254: 325-336. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J.,  OLMO-VIDAL, J.M., MAÑAS, F. &  BATET, A.  2002. Influence of seasonality of resources on 
the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra L.) breeding patterns in Mediterranean habitats. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 80: 
2178-2189. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J. & PALAZÓN, S. 1997. The diet of the European otter (Lutra lutra L.) in Mediterranean 
freshwater habitats.  Journal of Wildlife Research, 2: 171-181. 
SIDOROVICH, V.E. 1991. Structure, reproductive status and dynamics of the otter population in Byelorussia. 
Acta Theriologica, 36:153-161. 
SIDOROVICH, 
V.E. 
1997. 
Mustelids 
in 
Belarus. 
Evolutionary 
Ecology, 
Demography 
and 
Interspecific_Relationships. Zoloty uley publisher, Minsk. 
SIDOROVICH, V.E. & TUMANOV, I.L. 1994. Reproduction in otters in Belarus and north western Russia.  Acta 
Theriologica, 39: 59-66. 
STEPHENS, M. 1957. The Natural History of the Otter. UFAW, London. 
STUBBE, M. 1969. Zur Biologie und zum Schutz des Fischotters Lutra lutra (L.). Arch. Naturschutz 
Landschaftsforsch, 9: 315-324. 
STUBBE, M. 1989. Verbreitung und Ökologie des Fischotters Lutra lutra (L. 1758) in der DDR. 
Populationsökologie Marderartiger Säugetiere, 1: 9-12. 
WIJNGAARDEN, A. VAN & PEPPEL, J. VAN DE 1970. De otter, Lutra lutra (L.) in Nederland. Lutra, 12:  3-70. 
WLODECK, K. 1980. Der Fischotter in der Provinz Zachodnie (West-Pommern) in Polen. In:  Der Fischotter in 
Europa. Verbreitung, Bedrohung, Erhaltung (Edited by Reuther, C. and Festetics, A) Pp. 187-194. Selbstverlag, 
Oderhaus, Göttingen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
