--- 
source: 2007 000n-31.pdf
--- 

SEASONAL BREEDING IN EURASIAN OTTERS (LUTRA LUTRA) WITH SPECIFIC REFERENCE 
TO SCOTLAND 
 
James W H CONROY1 & Philip J BACON2 
 
1.  Celtic Environment Ltd., Old Mart Road, Torphins, Aberdeenshire AB31 4JG, Scotland, UK  
email:  jim@celticenvironment.wanadoo.co.uk  
2.  Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Banchory Research Station, Glassel, Banchory AB31 4BY, Scotland, UK  
 
 
Abstract.  Seasonality in otter breeding in Scotland was determined by an examination of otter carcasses.  Data from 
females and cubs confirmed that lactation peaked during the spring, with 58% of all lactating females and 51% of all 
suckling cubs being recovered then.  An interpretation of the dates of cub births established that most (45%) occurred 
during the winter period.   The body condition of lactating females was significantly greater than that of non-lactating 
females in each season.  A body condition of 0.85 is considered minimum to enable a female otter to breed successfully.  
A literature review from throughout Europe also confirmed a degree of seasonality which can vary from country to 
country.  
 
Keywords:  Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, breeding, seasonal, Europe 
 
 
1  INTRODUCTION 
 
In many publications over the past 50 years, the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) in Britain and 
elsewhere in Europe has been described as an aseasonal breeder.  Cubs can be born in any month of 
the year, with no apparent periods when births appear most frequently (STEPHENS, 1957; HARRIS, 
1968; CHANIN, 1985; MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986).  Females, at least in captivity, are known to 
be continually polyoestrous (DUPLAIX-HALL, 1975; TROWBRIDGE, 1983) and, therefore, are capable 
of becoming pregnant at any time of the year, and consequently cubs can be born during any month.  
Unlike the Canadian river otter (Lontra canadensis) (HAMILTON AND EADIE, 1964), the Eurasian 
otter does not apparently exhibit delayed implantation 
 
HEGGBERGET AND CHRISTENSEN (1994) reported that births of cubs can vary from seasonal 
to aseasonal among different populations quoting STEPHENS (1957), JENSEN (1964), VAN 
WIJNGAARDEN AND VAN DEN PEPPEL (1970), KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE  (1987) and 
SIDOROVICH (1991). 
 
CONROY AND FRENCH (1991), while discussing seasonality in otter defaecating (sprainting) 
behaviour, suggested that this was the result of a degree of seasonality in breeding.  As cubs get 
older they produce more faecal material and, if breeding were seasonal as it is in Shetland (KRUUK, 
CONROY AND MOORHOUSE, 1987), one would expect a seasonal distribution in the numbers of 
spraints (faeces) recorded.  CONROY AND FRENCH (1991) also suggested that seasonal breeding in 
the Eurasian otter might be the norm rather than the exception. 
 
In this paper, seasonal breeding in Scottish otters is considered.  The main sources of 
information are carcasses collected from throughout Scotland and a review of other published 
literature. 
 
 
2  METHODS 
 
For a number of years, otter carcasses from throughout Scotland were received at the Institute of 
Terrestrial Ecology (Centre for Ecology & Hydrology) laboratory, Banchory.  The bodies were 
usually deep frozen on receipt and stored in freezers in polythene bags to prevent desiccation.  


For analysis, carcasses were thawed, weighed, measured (total length, including tail), sexed 
and selected tissues removed for chemical analysis (see KRUUK AND CONROY, 1996; KRUUK, 
CONROY AND WEBB, 1997).  If a female was lactating or pregnant, this was noted.  In addition, to 
record the reproductive state of the females, the relative weight or ‘condition index’ K (LE CREN, 
1951) was calculated as: 
 
K  = W/aLn 
 
Where W = weight (kg), L = length (metres) – measured as a straight line from the tip of the nose to 
the end of the tail.  For the constants ‘a’ and ‘n’ the values determined for female otters on Shetland 
were used viz.  ‘a’ = 5.02; ‘n’ = 2.33. 
 
Because female otters do not usually breed until they are about two years old (STUBBE, 
1969; HEGGBERGET, 1986; CORBETT AND HARRIS, 1991; TUMANOV AND SIDOROVICH, 1994) only 
females older than this were included in the analysis. [Otters were aged by removing and sectioning 
a tooth and counting the annular rings (GRUE AND JENSEN, 1979; HEGGBERGET, 1996; GORMAN ET 
AL., 1998).]  Like the Canadian river otter (TOWEILL AND TABOR, 1982), the proportion of female 
Eurasian otters breeding at two years of age varies.  HAUER, ANSORGE AND ZINKE (2002) showed 
that ca. 20% of all females aged between three and five years of age showed evidence of having 
bred.  This compared with 55% of females aged six to nine year and 46% of ten to 15 year olds. 
However, it is unlikely that this will affect the results, there being no evidence to suggest that otters 
of different ages breed at different times of the year.  Although carcasses were received from all 
over Scotland, data from Shetland were excluded because it had already been demonstrated that 
otters on these islands usually breed seasonally (KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE, 1987).  For 
this paper data were available from 151 suitable females (40 lactating; 111 non-lactating). 
 
As well as adults, a number of cub carcasses were collected. According to KRUUK (1995), 
the period of lactation can be several months, while WAYRE (1979) lists it as 14 weeks in captive 
otters, by which time males cubs could already be heavier than females (HARRIS 1968).  At 14 
weeks, a male cub weighed about two kilogrammes.  Using these data, it was assumed that cubs 
with a weight of less than two kilogrammes, and/or who still had milk teeth, were still being 
weaned. Using these criteria the lactation periods of 41 cubs were determined. 
 The dates of birth of 60 cubs were estimated using the growth curve in HARRIS (1968, 
Figure 1). [The cubs’ weight and sex were plotted on the graph and from this, the birth date 
estimated.]  There are problems in using this approach, as the data presented in the graph are based 
on only two individuals and these were captive bred.  Data from Shetland has also shown that there 
can be a wide variation in the weights of cubs at a given age (J.W.H. CONROY, personal 
observations), the weight being affected, for example, by how the cub died; a young animal 
deserted by its mother is likely to weigh significantly less than an animal of the same age hit by a 
car.  GREEN in REUTHER (1999), for example, reported that two orphaned cubs lost 14% and 29% of 
their body weight during the day they were found.  REUTHER (1999) argued that, while there may be 
problems associated with using captive-bred data to determine the age of cubs that died in the wild, 
these are, at present, the only data available.  He concluded that cubs up to four months old could be 
aged to an accuracy of ± ten days.  
 
 
There are therefore four sets of data relating to breeding  
 
• 
lactating females 
• 
suckling cubs 
• 
cub births 
• 
body condition of females 
 


For the purposes of analysis, spring is taken as the three months February, March April; summer as 
May, June, July; autumn as August, September, October and winter November, December, January.  
These are the same seasons used in the Shetland studies (CONROY AND  FRENCH 1985, 1987, 1991; 
KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE, 1987; KRUUK AND CONROY, 1991). 
 
 
3  RESULTS 
 
3.1 Lactating females 
In the otter carcasses from Scotland, the numbers of non-lactating females (Table 1) do not differ 
significantly across seasons (χ2(3) = 1.41: P = 0.70), implying that reporting probabilities do not vary 
dramatically across the year.  However, there is a significant seasonal variation in the number of 
lactating females observed (χ2(3) = 18.0: P < 0.001), with a peak in spring.  There is also a 
significant difference between the seasonal distribution in the proportions of lactating and non-
lactating females (χ2(3) = 9.33: P < 0.05).  Accordingly the observed distribution of lactating females 
(Table 1) cannot be explained by assuming either: 
 
i 
lactating and non-lactating females are recovered with the same seasonally varying 
probabilities 
OR 
ii 
both the recovery probabilities and breeding ratios are constant over seasons. 
 
Thus apart from the unlikely possibility that recovery probabilities within season vary appreciably 
between lactating and non-lactating females, these data strongly suggest seasonality in the breeding 
of Scottish otters.  The peak of lactating was in the spring (23/40 – 58%) during the three months 
February, March, April, with nearly half (48%) of these females being recorded in February.  
Fewest lactating females were recorded in summer (4/40 – 10%). 
 
Table 1:  Seasonal distribution of otters, lactating and non-lactating, recovered in Scotland 
 
Status 
n 
Spring 
Summer 
Autumn 
Winter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lactating 
40 
23 (58%) 
4 (10%) 
7 (17.5%) 
6 (15%) 
Non-lactating 
111 
27 (24%) 
25 (22.5%) 
33 (30%) 
36 (32%) 
 
Just over 15% (23/151) of all adult female otters recovered in the spring were lactating, compared 
with only 2.5, 5 and 4% for summer, autumn and winter respectively. 
 
3.2 Suckling cubs 
The time of suckling of 41 cubs was determined (Table 2). There was a significant difference in 
their seasonal distribution (χ2(3) = 16.7: 0.005 >  P > 0.001). The peak period of suckling being 
spring, when it was estimated that 51% of the cubs examined were being suckled.  Fewest were 
reported in autumn (10%). 
 
Table 2:  Seasonal distribution of 41suckling cubs recovered in Scotland 
 
 
Spring 
Summer 
Autumn 
Winter 
Number of cubs (%) 
21 (51) 
8 (19.5) 
4 (10) 
8 (19.5) 
 
 
 


3.3 Birth of cubs 
Table 3 shows the distribution of estimated cub birth dates, allowing for the animal’s sex, weight 
and date of death.  Despite the small sample size, the observed seasonal distribution is not uniform 
[15 expected each season (χ2 (3) = 9.28: Pp < 0.03)], with a large peak (45%) during the winter and 
fewest occurring during the spring (10%).  Unsurprisingly, the seasonal pattern of cub births differs 
from the seasonal pattern of lactating females (χ2(3) = 11.49:  P < 0.01), but it is noted that the peak 
of births precedes the peak of lactation by a few months, commensurate with the period of intense 
cub dependency. 
 
Table 3:  Seasonal distribution of cub births in Scotland calculated from recovered carcases 
 
 
Spring 
Summer 
Autumn 
Winter 
Number of cubs (%) 
6 (10%) 
12 (20%) 
15 (25%) 
27 (45%) 
 
 
3.4 Body condition K 
The body condition (K) of 111 females (35 lactating, 76 non-lactating) was calculated (Table 4).  It 
appears that there is, on average, a difference between the condition of lactating and non-lactating 
females in the different seasons, the former being, on average, higher.  The greatest difference 
occurred in winter (the average K for lactating females being some 15% greater than the value for 
non-lactating females).  The smallest difference (< 0.1%) occurred in spring, the period when, if we 
accept the peak birth period being winter, there is likely to be the heaviest energy demands on the 
breeding females, and when the majority of the cubs are being weaned. 
 
Table 4:  Seasonal distribution of body condition (K) of lactating and non-lactating otters in Scotland 
 
 
 
Lactating 
Non-lactating 
 
 
 
Lactating 
Non-lactating 
Spring 
Mean 
1.12. 
1.11 
 
Autumn 
Mean 
1.19 
1.09 
 
s.e. 
0.03 
0.032 
 
 
s.e. 
0.057 
0.034 
 
N 
17 
25 
 
 
N 
7 
13 
 
Range 
0.87-1.4 
0.81 – 1.4 
 
 
Range 
0.96 – 1.36 
0.79 – 1.32 
Summer 
Mean 
1.11 
1.03 
 
Winter 
Mean 
1.22 
1.06 
 
s.e. 
0.056 
0.054 
 
 
s.e. 
0.055 
0.039 
 
N 
7 
16 
 
 
N 
4 
22 
 
Range 
0.87 – 1.41 
0.62 – 1.46 
 
 
Range 
1.07 – 1.32 
0.63 – 1.26 
 
 
4  SHETLAND  
 
It has long been assumed that otter breeding in Shetland was seasonal, with the majority of cubs 
being born during the summer (KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE, 1987) and that the availability 
of suitable prey during July-August was strongly correlated with the numbers of cubs [r = 0.99, r2   
= 0.96: P < 0.001] and the number of families [rs = 0.97: P < 0.05] recorded in the autumn and 
winter (KRUUK, CONROY AND  MOORHOUSE, 1991; KRUUK, 1995).  
During a routine population census of otters in Shetland in the late 1990s, however, concern 
was expressed about an apparent decline in otter numbers.  Subsequent counts confirmed this 
(CONROY, HARVEY AND HOLMES, 2000; CONROY 2002; 2003).  Effectively over a period of 14 
years, otter numbers counted at 11 areas of Shetland declined from a peak of 158 in 1995 to a low 
of 108 in 1998, but by 2003 had increased again to 159 animals (CONROY, 2004).  A detailed 
monitoring programme of one area, Kirkabister on Yell, where regular observations had been made 
over an 11-year period showed marked changes in breeding performance over much of this period 
(Table 5). 


 
 
Table 5: Breeding performance of female otters at Kirkabister, Yell between 1989 and 2000 
 
Period 
 
1989- June 1994 
July 1994-2000 
 
 
 
 
Number of years 
 
5 
6 
Total number of females in area 
 
13 
12 
Average number of females per year 
 
2.6 
2.0 
Total number of females with cubs 
 
13 
9 
% females with cubs 
 
100 
75 
Average number of families pre year 
 
2.6 
1.5 
Total number of cubs seen 
 
28 
14 
Average number of cubs per year 
 
5.6 
2.3 
Average number of cubs per family 
 
2.2 
1.6 
Average number of cubs per female 
 
2.0 
1.2 
Number of late cubs (1) 
 
0 
8  
% cubs born late 
 
0 
57 
Number of years with no cubs 
 
0 
1 
 
Key 
1. 
Because most cubs are born during the summer and appear above ground in July-September, newly emerged 
cubs first seen after 1 October are considered as being ‘late’ 
 
The years between 1988 and mid-summer 1994 were considered as a period during which 
population numbers were either high or increasing, while post-summer 1994 numbers were 
considered declining or recovering.  For details of how these dates were decided see CONROY, 
HARVEY AND HOLMES (2000).   
Effectively, during the early period when the population was high and/or increasing, cub 
production was high (numbers of cubs, families as well as litter sizes), breeding was seasonal and 
no late cubs were reported.  When numbers were decreasing, cub production fell, fewer cubs were 
born, with no cubs being recorded in one year, while breeding became aseasonal (57% of cubs were 
not born in the summer).  
 
 
5  COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS STUDIES IN THE UK 
 
The results of this study differ markedly from most of those published elsewhere in the UK (Table 
6).  
 
Table 6: Distribution of otter breeding records in different seasons 
 
 
Scotland 
This 
study 
UK 
STEPHENS 
(1957) 
UK 
HARRIS 
(1968) 
Shetland 
KRUUK 
(1995) 
NW Scotland 
[ROWBOTTOM  
in KRUUK (1995)] 
UK 
MASON  & 
MACDONALD (1986) 
Wales 
ENGLISH 
NATURE 
(2002) 
Season 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spring 
10% 
21% 
22% 
11% 
15% 
Jan – Mar  25% 
16% 
Summer 
20% 
25% 
20% 
71% 
40% 
Apr – Jun 21% 
9% 
Autumn 
25% 
27% 
27% 
18% 
23% 
July – Sept 28% 
30% 
Winter 
45% 
28% 
30% 
0% 
22% 
Oct – Dec 26% 
45% 
Numbers 
60 
134 
164 
 
 
240 
93 
 
Note:  The data presented in HARRIS (1968) includes data from STEPHENS (1957), while those in MASON AND 
MACDONALD (1986) include both STEPHENS (1957) and HARRIS (1968) data. 
 


Based primarily on unpublished diaries and records from naturalists and otter hunters, STEPHENS 
(1957) found 134 ‘reliable instances in which cubs have been seen together with their approximate 
age and size’.  From these data, which it is assumed came from across the UK, she argued that 
breeding occurred throughout the year, and that there was no evidence of seasonal breeding (Table 
6).  HARRIS (1968) also used Stephen’s data, plus additional information from earlier works, 
including SOUTHWELL (1872-73; 1877) and COCKS (1877) to show the distribution of 164 births 
(Table 6).  MASON AND MACDONALD (1986) present data from 240 observations, but it is uncertain 
whether or not their figures included those of HARRIS and STEPHENS.  None of the data presented in 
these three publications showed any evidence of seasonal breeding in the UK, although all studies 
showed a tendency for more births to be recorded during autumn/winter.  MASON AND MACDONALD 
(1986) mention a degree of seasonality in some populations.  For example, in the north west 
highlands of Scotland, ROWBOTTOM AND ROWBOTTOM (1980) reported that the majority of births, 
albeit based on a small number of litters were in the summer [ROWBOTTOM’s data presented in 
KRUUK (1995) confirms this (Table 6)].  
The situation in Wales is similar to Scotland.  Data collected by G. LILES (in ENGLISH 
NATURE, 2002) estimated the birth period from a number of sources, including road traffic 
accidents, orphaned cubs and direct observations.  Data for 93 such records showed a clear winter 
peak (45%) followed by autumn (30%) (Table 6). 
Few data are available from England, SIMPSON (1998) found evidence from post mortems 
suggesting that peak births also occurred in winter, although the author correctly points out that the 
sample size (6) is very small. 
For a number of years, the International Otter Survival Fund (IOSF), on the Isle of Skye, has 
received orphaned otter cubs for rehabilitation. Of 33 taken into care, it was estimated that 13 (39%) 
were born during the winter, 33% during autumn, 27% in spring and only 6% in summer.  These 
data also confirm a degree of seasonality with winter being the favoured period. JANE TWELVES (in 
MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986), however, reported that on the Outer Hebrides, Scotland, otters 
breed throughout the year, while FAIRLEY (1975) supports the idea that the species breeds 
throughout the year on Ireland.  Neither of these last two named researchers suggest any degree of 
seasonality. Historical accounts describe a different breeding situation with LYDEKKER (1896), BELL 
(1887) and JOHNSTON (1903), for example, all reporting that young were born in March/April.  
These dates, however, could refer to the time the cubs were first seen (i.e. above ground), some ten 
weeks after birth. 
 
 
 6  OTTER BREEDING ACROSS EUROPE 
 
Table 7 updates information presented in CONROY AND FRENCH (1991).  It shows a wide variation 
in breeding, peaks being found in all four seasons, with summer being the most frequent. Care, 
however, should be taken in the interpretation of these data because in some instance the problems 
of determining the date of birth, discussed above, might also be valid. 
 
The situation in Belarus appears uncertain.  In an early paper SIDOROVICH (1991) produces 
data that clearly demonstrates a summer peak, but in later papers, two peaks are clearly 
demonstrated – April/May and October/November (SIDOROVICH, 1994; SIDOROVICH, PIKILIK AND 
TUMANOV, 1997). According to references in SIDOROVICH, PIKILIK AND TUMANOV (1997) late 
autumn breeding is common in Eastern Europe, quoting the work of DANILOV AND TUMANOV, 
1976; VAISFELD, 1977; SIDOROVICH AND TUMANOV (1994).   In south west Portugal, two peaks in 
breeding were also reported, but these are from different habitat types –coastal sites have a peak in 
late autumn/early winter, while at inland sites the peak is late winter/early spring (BEJA, 1996). 
[These last data, however, were collected from questionnaires and the results should therefore be 
treated with some caution.] 


It is interesting to note that of the five studies where there are actual figures for the numbers 
of females giving birth, the proportions recorded during the peak seasons are similar at Mainland 
Scotland (45%), Norway (49%), Belarus (49%), Czechoslovakia (52%) and Netherlands (42%) [this 
latter  sample is based on a small sample of only 17]. 
 
Table 7:  The main breeding seasons of otters in Europe 
 
Country 
Peak breeding season 
Notes 
Reference 
Scotland 
-   Shetland 
Summer 
 
KRUUK ET AL. (1987) 
KRUUK (1995) 
Scotland 
- Mainland 
Winter 
45% of births in winter (n=60)  
This study 
Finland 
 - Central 
May – September  
(n = 119) 
52% of birth in May – June  
(n = 25) 
SULKAVA (2004) 
Belarus 
Summer 
49% of births in summer (n=41) 
SIDOROVICH (1991) 
Belarus 
Two peaks:    April/May 
and October/November 
October/November peak associated with 
fast flowing water 
SIDOROVICH (1994) 
SIDOROVICH, PIKILIK AND 
TUMANOV (1997)  
Denmark 
July to September 
 
ELMEROS AND MADSEN 
(1999) 
Norway 
- north coasts 
Summer 
49% of births in summer (n=74) 
HEGGBERGET AND 
CHRISTENSEN (1994) 
Czechoslovakia 
Summer 
52% of births in summer (n=56) 
BARUS AND ZEDJA (1981) 
Netherlands 
Autumn 
42% of births in autumn 
VAN WIJNGAARDEN AND 
VAN DEN PEPPEL (1970) 
Sweden 
 - southern 
Spring 
All instances in spring 
ERLINGE (1967) 
Portugal 
- inland 
- coastal 
January-March 
October - December 
Questionnaire survey 
BEJA (1996) 
Germany 
 - west 
Spring 
Peak 
REUTHER (1980) 
Germany 
 - east 
Summer peak 
All year, but summer segregated from 
all other seasons 
HAUER, ANSORGE AND 
ZINKE (2002) 
Russia 
 - north west 
Spring/summer 
Apr/ June & Sept/Oct 
Two peaks 
DANILOV ANDTUMANOV 
(1975) 
TUMANOV  AND 
SIDOROVICH (1994) 
Spain 
- north east 
Pyrenees (high 
altitude 
Mediterranean 
(upland) 
Mediterranean 
(lowlands – 
fish diet)) 
Mediterranean 
(lowlands -
fish/crayfish 
diet) 
 
Summer      
Aseasonal 
 
March – June 
 
 
December – February 
 
December - September 
 
May – September 
 
 
 
 
 
Dry years 
 
‘Normal’ years 
 
RUIZ-OLMO (1993-1994) 
RUIZ-OLMO  ET AL. (2004) 
 
RUIZ-OLMO  ET AL. (2004) 
 
 
RUIZ-OLMO  ET AL. (2004) 
 
RUIZ-OLMO  ET AL. (2004) 
Hungary 
No seasonality 
 
GERA (2001) 
 
 
7  DISCUSSION 
 
These results show that at least in Scotland, while lactating females and newborn cubs can be found 
in any season, there is a seasonal peak in the appearance of both.  For Shetland the peak of births 
was assumed to be during the summer (KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE, 1987; KRUUK, 1995).  
Elsewhere in Scotland, the peak is during the winter (45%) followed a few months later, in spring, 


by a peak in lactating females (58%) and cubs (51%).  In addition lactating females are, on average, 
in better condition than those not weaning cubs. 
 
It is accepted that in this study there are problems in how the birth dates of the cubs were 
calculated (see Methods section).  Any errors that occur, however, are likely to be consistent and 
should not be affected by the date, or weight of the cubs at death.  What these data clearly show is a 
seasonal peak in births in the winter, which is earlier than the peak of lactation by a time interval 
comparable (for these data) with the period of weaning.   
Females feeding cubs on milk will lose more weight by the simple factor that the cubs will 
‘remove’ additional weight (i.e. milk) from their mother – the larger the litter and the older the cubs, 
the greater the weight removed.  Non-lactating females will not have this demand and, therefore, 
lose less weight.  The fact that, despite the additional energy demands paced upon them, the body 
condition of lactating females is on average higher than non-lactating individuals at the same season 
suggests that females in poor condition rarely breed successfully (the least difference [<1%] 
between the two groups of females was in spring, the period of highest energy demands on lactating 
females).   Pregnant females require energy and nutrients to form uterine foetal, placental and 
mammary tissues.  To support these increased energy costs in late pregnancy, maternal intake needs 
to increase and/or energy accumulated earlier in pregnancy needs to be mobilised.  There are few 
data on energy demands available for carnivores, let alone mustelids, and many of these refer to 
domestic animals. LOVERIDGE (1986), for example, showed that in the domestic cat (Felis 
domesticus), the energy demands of the female doubled when litters of two and five were 
compared; also during pregnancy, the mother’s energy requirements increased by a factor of 1.5-
1.7.  GITTLEMAN AND OFTEDAL (1987) as well as OFTEDAL AND GITTLEMAN (1989) examined 
energy demands in carnivores; for domestic species, the daily energy requirement was 100-150 kcal 
ME per kg 0.79, where ME is the metabolisable energy (i.e. ingested  energy minus energy lost 
through excreta) [data from National Research Council in OFTEDAL AND GITTLEMAN (1989)].  
Levels in wild carnivores will be higher (MACDONALD, ROGER AND MORRIS, 1984).  Milk 
production has a high-energy output, in the region of 150-200 kcal per kg 0.79 per day.  Female 
carnivores may need to increase their ME by 150-300% to meet the requirements of peak 
production.  The estimated energy requirements for mustelids are given in Table  8. 
 
 
Table 8:  Estimated daily energy outputs  (kcal/kg0.75/day) during pregnancy and peak lactation by Mustelidae 
[fromOFTEDAL AND GITTLEMAN (1989)] 
 
 
Daily energy deposition
during pregnancy 
Post natal growth 
rate 
Milk energy output at 
peak lactation 
 
 
 
 
Mustelidae 
1.94 ± 0.27 (13)* 
25.7 ± 4.7 (11)* 
193 ± 17.8  (7)* 
 
* Number of species for which data are available. 
 
While energy demands will vary between species and between individuals within species, it would 
appear that, at least, in the otter, a threshold value of K greater then 0.85 is required before a female 
can successfully breed.  Females with values lower than this may not have the capacity to carry 
embryos to term, or be able to supply sufficient milk to wean their litters.  The greatest difference in 
body condition between lactating and non-lactating otters was in winter (15% of the average non-
lactating otter’s body condition), the period of peak births.  It should be noted that because no 
pregnant females were also scored as ‘lactating’ then the mass of the foetus will increase K in the 
non-lactating group, so the real difference in adult body condition between lactating and non-
lactating females is presumably greater.  The least difference (<1%) occurred in spring, the peak 
lactation period, when females with cubs are likely to have the heaviest energy demands upon them 
(GITTLEMAN AND OFTEDAL, 1987).  Using a three-point method to score body condition, 


HEGGBERGET AND CHRISTENSEN (1994) found that females were in better breeding condition during 
the breeding period – the latter half of the year.  For eastern Germany, HAUER, ANSORGE AND ZINKE 
(2002) found that body condition of breeding females was higher than in non-breeding females.  
Condition was lowest in spring, highest in winter, and the difference between breeders and non-
breeders least in summer.  ELMEROS AND MADSEN (1999) did not find a significant difference in the 
body condition indices in breeding females, suggesting that this was due to the fact that the lack in 
variation in body condition is the result of stable food resources. 
 
How can the differences between this study and the other published data for the UK be 
explained?  Establishing when cubs are born is extremely difficult.  Otters are solitary animals, and 
in the UK, largely nocturnal and relatively rare.  Cubs are not usually seen until they are several 
weeks old, possibly ten weeks at the earliest.  In Shetland, where otters are diurnal, and there have 
been detailed studies [see KRUUK (1995) for details], it is possible, over a number of years, to 
record fairly accurately when cubs first appeared above ground, so it is relatively easy to calculate 
back to the approximate date of birth (KRUUK ET AL., 1987; KRUUK AND CONROY, 1991).   
 
Care should, however, be taken in the interpretation in the data particularly from STEPHENS 
(1957) and HARRIS (1968).  The dates the cubs were born were interpreted from ‘their approximate 
age and size’ (HARRIS, 1968).  There is, however, a wide variation in the growth rates of otter cubs, 
and males grow much faster than females.  (HARRIS 1968: Figure 1) shows the growth rate of two 
cubs raised in captivity, the male reached three kilogrammes after 20 weeks, the female took a 
further 19 weeks to reach this weight.  In addition, when cubs first appear above ground they are 
already eight to ten weeks old by which time males will already be larger than females.  HARRIS 
(1968) further pointed out that there were differences in sizes between litters.  At about four 
months, two male cubs (in a litter of two) were nearly twice the size of three females and two males 
(in a litter of five).  It is argued that only in detailed studies, such as in Shetland, where the otter is 
diurnal and there is a high probability of cubs being seen very shortly after they first leave their 
holts, that it is possible to accurately estimate dates of birth. 
 
Winter might seem an unusual season for otters to give birth in Scotland.  It is the season 
when for long periods the temperature can be low, often sub-zero, rivers and lochs can be frozen 
and there can be snow on the ground.  Also natal holts can be some distance from water and on 
occasions, for example in wetlands, are found above ground, a nest being furnished in reed beds 
(TAYLOR AND KRUUK, 1990).  Cubs living in such holts are subject to more extreme weather 
conditions than those born underground.  PITT (1938) also reported otters breeding in reed beds in 
the Fens of East Anglia (England), while THESIGER (1964) tells of otters (species not determined) in 
the marshes of Iran breeding on reed islands. 
KRUUK (1995) pointed out that energy demands are highest at the time of peak lactation, 
which in carnivores is thought to be the time just before solid food is first introduced into the diet of 
cubs (GITTLEMAN AND OFTEDAL, 1987).  One would therefore expect food to be most readily 
available in the right qualities and in the correct size range at that time of the year.  This is certainly 
the case in Shetland, where the number of cubs recorded was significantly recorded to the amount 
of the otters’ principal prey during the summer and early autumn months (KRUUK ET AL., 1987; 
KRUUK AND CONROY, 1991). 
Otters hunt almost exclusively in aquatic habitats (CHANIN, 1985).  Their diet in Scotland is 
primarily fish, with eels (Anguilla anguilla) and salmonids (Salmo spp.) forming the main 
components of the diet in freshwater habitats (JENKINS, WALKER AND MCGOWAN, 1979; JENKINS 
AND HARPER, 1980) and demersal, inshore living species forming the main component in marine 
habitats (KRUUK, 1995).   SINHA AND JONES (1975) reported that eels, at least in Welsh rivers, are 
inactive over the winter period.  From studies of eel diet, these authors showed that between 
January and March, eels ate little, the main feeding period being April to June.  If at the end of the 
period of inactivity (towards the end of March), eels begin to forage extensively, they become more 
available to hunting otters. [TECH (1977) has shown that eel catches increase in this time, 


supporting the idea that they are more readily available to otters.]  If this is the situation on 
Mainland Scotland, then lactating females would have ready access to an increasing food resource 
just as lactating was peaking.  Water temperatures are still likely to be relatively low at this period, 
making eels sluggish and easier to fall prey to otters.  Salmonids are also more sluggish in the 
spring and may also be easier to catch. 
Amphibians form an important seasonal prey of otters [see JENKINS, WALKER AND 
MCGOWAN (1979) and WEBER (1990) for data from north east Scotland].  Frogs and toads are most 
vulnerable to predation when they congregate to breed at spawning time, which is in the spring 
(BREATHNACH AND FAIRLEY, 1993; JEDRZEJEWSKI, ZALEWSKI AND JEDRZEJEWSKI, 1993).  WEBER 
(1990) found that toads (Bufo bufo) accounted for only 2% of the otter diet in Deeside, Scotland.  
BROWN (1997), however, in the same study area but a number of years later recorded frogs (Rana 
temporaria) as the most important amphibian prey, but toads were also important. [Of 773 spraints 
in which amphibian remains were identified, frogs were found in 91% and toads in 12%.] Because 
toads are only partially eaten by otters, their remains are less likely to be recorded in spraints than 
frog remains (JENKINS, WALKER AND MCGOWAN. 1979).  During her study, BROWN (1997) found 
the peak of frog breeding was in March-April, the peak of toad breeding in May.  Should 
amphibians prove to be easier for otters to catch than fish, an aggregation of them would be an ideal 
source of food, especially for females weaning/feeding young cubs.  This would, however, also 
depend on the nutritional value of the prey (BEGON, MORTIMER AND THOMPSON, 1996).  This may 
be especially important for the otter, because of thermoregulatory problems of foraging in water and 
the energy expenses incurred by swimming (KRUUK, TAYLOR AND MOM, 1997; KRUUK AND CARSS, 
1996). 
In comparison with eels, the calorific values of amphibians are much lower and, in terms of 
calorific content, the former is, at first sight, a much more profitable prey item for the otter (Table 
9). 
 
 
Table 9:  Calorific values, kilojoules per gram (kj/g), dry weight of amphibians and eels from Deeside, 
Scotland [from NELSON AND KRUUK (1998)] 
 
Species 
Number 
Mean vales (Kj.g) 
s.e.  
Range 
Eel 
45 
23.13 
0.51 
19.83 – 31.64 
Frog* 
15 
17.84 
0.2 
 
Toad** 
15 
17.37 
0.16 
 
 
   *   spawn removed from gravid females 
** spawn removed from gravid females, skin also removed because otters do not eat toad  skin (WEBER, 1990) 
 
During the early spring, when fish availability may be lowest (KRUUK ET AL., 1993), frogs and toads 
congregate in large numbers to breed; their high energy content and relative ease of capture make it 
energetically worthwhile for otters to feed selectively on amphibians despite their lower calorific 
values.  In north east Scotland amphibian prey remains in spraints are commonest during the spring 
(BROWN, 1997). 
 
Spring may be the time, at least in Scotland, when prey is most readily available, eels 
become more active, amphibians congregate in large numbers and salmonids are sluggish, so 
hunting places less energy demands on otters.  This is especially important for females with young 
cubs, lactation being at the time when there is the heaviest energy demands on the mother. 
SIDOROVICH, PIKILIK AND TUMANOV (1997) also linked the late autumn breeding peak in 
Belarus with the behaviour of frogs. They showed that this peak was associated largely with faster 
flowing rivers, in which frogs congregate.  Although these watercourses may ice over, restricting 
otter access to them, the authors show that the actual availability of this prey at this time increases 
by a factor of between two and ten. 


In Shetland, KRUUK, CONROY AND MOORHOUSE (1987) showed that breeding was linked to 
the time of maximum food availability so that cubs started to take solid food during this period of 
abundance, which is late summer. However, subsequent observations from Shetland showed that 
when numbers declined breeding behaviour changed dramatically with a move away from a largely 
seasonal regime to an aseasonal one. Also cub production declined. CONROY, HARVEY AND 
HOLMES (2000) suggested that the change was a response to a reduction in the availability of prey.  
When fish is plentiful, females can obtain sufficient food in spring, enabling them to reach a body 
condition (probably >0.85) and they can breed in the summer.  The few females which do not 
follow this pattern could well be animals  
• 
which have lost their cubs early in pregnancy or when they were quite young and come 
into condition later; 
• 
whose cubs from the [previous year took longer than usual to leave their mother. 
SIDOROVICH, PIKILIK AND TUMANOV. (1997) pointed out that a number of females may breed 
only every other year 
• 
which are either breeding for the first time or are inexperienced  and take longer to reach 
breeding condition, what HAUER, ANSROGE AND ZINKE (2002) refer to as the ‘targeted 
preparation’ for breeding. 
 
In years when fish biomass is low, there will be no single period when the bulk of the females might 
reach a condition to breed.  Rather breeding becomes asynchronous, females breeding as and when 
they come into condition regardless of the time of year, and so females can be seen with small cubs 
at a time when even in ‘good’ years food is difficult to obtain (e.g. February in Shetland).  The 
result is that fewer females breed, and litter sizes, at least when cubs appear above ground, are 
smaller. In such years, it will probably take females longer to raise their cubs, possibly 15 months, 
so when breeding occurs the following season more females will be ‘out of synchrony’. If this is the 
case, then even when otter numbers are again high, it will take longer for seasonal breeding to 
become re-established.  This is in fact what has happened in Shetland.  Numbers in 2002 were near 
those of the early 1990s, and while the proportion of females breeding in the summer also 
increased, the numbers (and proportions) were still less than in the 1990s. 
In Spain, RUIZ-OLMO (1994) and RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2004) found that there were years of 
‘good’ and ‘bad’ fish availability.  Otter numbers fluctuated in relation to food availability.  In ‘bad’ 
years, females tended to have fewer cubs.  In one year fish availability was so low that no breeding 
was recorded (a similar situation to that recorded in Shetland).  When compared with areas where 
otter diets were almost unspecific, litter sizes were higher in areas where food diversity was also 
higher (RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2004). 
HEGGBERGET AND CHRISTENSEN (1994) found that breeding occurred along the coasts of 
central Norway throughout the year, but with a peak of breeding in late summer/autumn.  The 
preferred prey of the species was also high at this time and low in late winter/spring (HEGGBERGET, 
1993).  Using a cub index to determine the month of birth, HEGGBERGET AND CHRISTENSEN (1994) 
showed that there was a significant correlation between the mean fish biomass two months after the 
month of peak birth. No similar correlations were found for either the actual birth month or for three 
months after the birth. 
All these studies have shown that there are periods when prey availability is low, and that 
this can affect not only the time that otters breed, but also breeding behaviour. 
This might be different in the Mediterranean areas of the Iberian peninsula, where, even 
when the diet was variable and highly abundant, litter sizes were smaller than in other areas with a 
similar diet composition.  In such instances, RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2004) concluded that the cause of 
the difference was that the main source of prey was adversely affected by a lack of water, just at a 
time when the prey species should be most abundant. 


If breeding is largely seasonal, why then are female otters in continuous oestrus?  
HEGGBERGET AND CHRISTENSEN (1994) suggested that this was a risk reduction strategy (PHILIPPI 
AND SEGER, 1987; YOSHIMURA AND CLARK, 1991).  If females are in continuous oestrus and dog 
otters are always ready to mate, it will be possible to have a further breeding attempt shortly after 
the loss of a litter. The timing of the second attempt is likely to be determined by the female 
reaching breeding condition.  This means that the female otter, which, on average, has a relatively 
short breeding life (CONROY, 1993) need not miss out a complete year before breeding again.  Even 
if the environmental conditions are not ideal, she will at least have a possibility of raising a family, 
albeit possibly one that would be smaller than normal. Such a strategy would therefore be beneficial 
for the survival of the otter. 
These results show that while otter cubs can be born at any time of the year, there is a peak 
period of births.  This period is linked to the time when prey is most readily available for lactating 
females.  
 
 
8  REFERENCES 
 
BARUS, S. & ZEDJA, J.  1981.  The European otter (Lutra lutra) in the Czech Socialist Republic. Acta Scientiarum  
Naturalium Academiae Scientiarium Behemoslovacae, Brno, 15: 1-41. 
BEGON. M., MORTIMER, M. & THOMPSON, D.J.  1996.  Population Ecology. A unified study of animals and plants. 
Blackwell Science, Oxford. 
BEJA, P.R.  1996.  Seasonal breeding and food resources of otters, Lutra lutra (Carnivora, Mustelidae), in south west 
Portugal: a comparison between coastal otters and inland sites.  Mammalia, 60: 27-34. 
BELL, T.  1887.  A History of British Quadrupeds including the Cetacea.  J. van Voost, London. 
BREATHNACH, S. & FAIRLEY, J.S.  1993.  The diet of otters Lutra lutra (L.) in the Clare river system. Proceedings of 
the Royal Irish Academy, 93: 151-158. 
BROWN, L. 1997.  The Ecology of Anurans in a Wetland System in north east Scotland and Implications for Predation 
by Otters (Lutra lutra). Ph.D. Thesis, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen. 
CHANIN, P.R.F.  1985.  The Natural History of Otters.  Croon Helm, London. 
COCKS, A.H.  1877.  On the breeding of the otter.  Zoologist, 1: 100-101. 
CONROY, J.W.H. 1993.  Otter mortality and survival.  In: Proceedings of the National Otter Conference, Cambridge 
1992. (Edited by Morris, P.A.)  Mammal Society, Bristol. 
CONROY, J.W.H.  2003.  Population fluctuations in Shetland otters (Lutra lutra).  Shetland Sea Mammal Report for 
2001 and 2002.15-18. 
CONROY, J.W.H. & FRENCH D.D.  1985.  Monitoring Otters in Shetland.  Final report to the Shetland Oil Terminal 
Environmental Advisory Group.  Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Banchory. 64pp. [Unpublished] 
CONROY, J.W.H. & FRENCH D.D.  1987.  The use of spraints to monitor populations of otters (Lutra lutra).  Symposia 
of the Zoological Society of London, 58: 247-262. 
CONROY, J.W.H. & FRENCH D.D.  1991.  Seasonal patterns in the sprainting behaviour of otters (Lutra lutra) in 
Shetland. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel1989. (Edited by Reuther, C. & 
Röcher, R.). Habitat, 6: 159-166. 
CONROY, J.W.H., HARVEY, P. & HOLMES, T.  2000.  Changes in otter numbers in Shetland – should there be concern?  
Shetland Sea Mammal Report for 1997, 13-15. 
CORBETT, G.B. & HARRIS, S.  1991.  The Handbook of British Mammals. Blackwell Scientific Press, Oxford. 
DANILOV, P.I. & TUMANOV, I.L.  1975.  The reproductive cycles of some Mustelidae species.  Byull.Mosk. O-va  Ispyt. 
Oto. Biol., 80: 35-47. 
DUPLAIX-HALL, N.  1975.  River otters in captivity.  In: Breeding Endangered Species in Captivity. Edited by R.D. 
Martin. Pp. 315-327.  Academic Press, London. 
ELMEROS, M. & MADSEN, A.B. 1999.  On the reproduction biology of otters (Lutra lutra) from Denmark.  Zeitschrift 
für Säugetierkunde, 64: 193-200. 
ENGLISH NATURE 2002. Techniques for Improving the Status of Lutra lutra. English Nature, Peterborough [draft]. 
ERLINGE, S.  1967.  Home range of the otter Lutra lutra in southern Sweden.  Oikos, 18: 186-209. 
FAIRLEY, J.S. 1975.  An Irish Beast Book.  Blackstaff Press, Belfast. 
GERA, P. 2001. Summary of Hungarian Otter Surveys (Lutra lutra) 1995-2001. Foundation for Otters, Budapest. 
GITTLEMAN, J.L. & OFTEDAL, O.T.  1987.  Comparative growth and lactation energetics in Carnivores.  Symposia of 
the Zoological Society of London, 57: 41-77. 


GORMAN, M., KRUUK, H., JONES, C., MCLAREN, G. & CONROY, J.W.H.  1998.  The demography of European  otters 
Lutra lutra.  In Behaviour and Ecology of Riparian Mammals.  (Edited by Dunstone, N & Gorman, M.L.)  Symposia of 
the Zoological Society of London.  No 71:  107-118 
GRUE, H. & JENSEN, B. 1979.  Review of the formation of incremental lines in tooth cementum of terrestrial mammals.  
Danish Review of Game Biology.  11:  1-48 
HAMILTON, W.J. & EADIE, W.R. 1964. Reproduction in the otter, Lutra canadensis. Journal of Mammalogy, 45: 242-
252 
HARRIS, C.J. 1968. Otters. A study of the recent Lutrinae. Weidenfeld & Nicholson. 
HAUER, S., ANSORGE, H. & ZINKE, O. 2002. Reproductive performance of otters Lutra lutra (Linnaeus, 1758) in 
Eastern Germany: low reproduction in a long-term strategy. BiologicalJournal of the Linnean Society, 77: 329-340. 
HEGGBERGET, T.M. 1993.  Marine feeding otters (Lutra lutra) in Norway:  seasonal variation in prey and reproductive 
timing.  Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom.  73: 297-312 
HEGGBERGET, T.M. & CHRISTENSEN, H. 1994. Reproductive timing in Eurasian otters on the coast of Norway. 
Ecography, 17:  339-348. 
JEDRZEJEWSKI, W., ZALEWSKI, A. & JEDRZEJEWSKI, B. 1993. Foraging by pine martens Martes martes in relation to 
food resources in Bialowwieza National Park, Poland. Acta Theriologica, 38: 405-426. 
JENKINS, D. & HARPER, R. J. 1980. Ecology of otters in northern Scotland II Analysis of otter (Lutra lutra) and mink 
(Mustela vison) faeces from Deeside , north east Scotland in 1977-78. Journal of Animal Ecology, 49: 637-654. 
JENKINS, D., WALKER, J.G.K. & MCGOWAN, D. 1979. Analysis of otter faeces from Deeside, north east Scotland. 
Journal of Zoology, London, 187: 235-244. 
JENSEN, A. 1964. Odderen I Danmark. Danske Viltundersøgelser, 11: 1-18. 
JOHNSTON, H. 1903. British Mammals - an attempt to describe and illustrate the mammalian fauna of the British 
Islands from the commencement of the Pleistocene period down to the present day. Hutchinson & Co., London 
KRUUK, H. 1995. Wild otters. Predation and populations. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
KRUUK, H. & CARSS, D.N. 1996. Costs and benefits of fishing by a semi-aquatic carnivore, the otter Lutra lutra. In: 
Aquatic predators and their prey. (Edited by Greenstreet, S.P,.R. & Tasker, M.L.) Pp 10-16. Fishing News Books, 
Oxford. 
KRUUK, H., CARSS, D.N., CONROY, J.W.H. & DURBIN, L. 1993. Otter (Lutra lutra L.) numbers and fish productivity 
in rivers in north east Scotland. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, 65: 171-191. 
KRUUK, H. & CONROY, J.W.H. 1987. Mortality of otters Lutra lutra in Shetland. Journal of Applied Ecology, 28: 95-
101. 
KRUUK, H. & CONROY, J.W.H. 1991.  Mortality of otters Lutra lutra in Shetland.  Journal of Applied Ecology.  28: 83-
94 
KRUUK, H. & CONROY, J.W.H. 1996. Concentrations of some organochlorines in otters (Lutra lutra) in Scotland: 
implications for populations. Environmental Pollution, 92: 165-171. 
KRUUK, H., CONROY, J.W.H. & MOORHOUSE, A. 1987. Seasonal reproduction, mortality and food availability of 
otters Lutra lutra L., in Shetland. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London, 58: 263-278. 
KRUUK, H., CONROY, J.W.H. & MOORHOUSE, A.  1991.  Recruitment to a population of otters (Lutra lutra) in 
Shetland in relation to fish abundance.  Journal of Applied Ecology.  28:  95-101 
KRUUK, H., CONROY, J.W.H. & WEBB, A. 1997. Concentrations of mercury in otters (Lutra lutra L.) in Scotland in 
relation to rainfall. Environmental Pollution, 96: 13-18. 
KRUUK, H., TAYLOR, P.S. & MOM, G.A.T. 1997. Body temperature and foraging behaviour of the Eurasian otter  
(Lutra lutra) in relation to water temperature. Journal of Zoology, London, 241: 689-697. 
LECREN, E.D. 1951. The length-weight relationship and seasonal cycle in gonad weight and condition in the perch 
Perca fluviatilis. Journal of Animal Ecology, 20: 201-209. 
LOVERIDGE, G.G. 1986. Body weight changes and energy intake of cats during gestation and lactation. Animal 
Technology, 37: 7-15. 
LYDEKKER, R. 1896. A Handbook of British Mammalia. E. Lloyd, London. 
MACDONALD, M.L., ROGERS, Q.R. & MORRIS, J.G. 1984. Nutrition of the domestic cat, mammalian carnivore. 
Annual Review of Nutrition, 4: 521-526. 
MASON, C.F. & MACDONALD, S.M. 1986. Otters, conservation and ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
NELSON, K.C. & KRUUK, H. 1997. The prey of otters: calorific content of eels (Anguilla anguilla) and other fish, frogs 
(Rana temporaria) and toads (Bufo bufo). I.U.C.N. Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 14: 5-80. 
OFTEDAL, O.T. & GITTLEMAN, J.L. 1989.  Patterns of energy output during reproduction in carnivores (In Carnivore 
Behaviour, Ecology and Evolution.  (Edited by Gittleman, J.L.) Pp 355-378.  Cornell University Press.  Ithaca.  
PHILIPPI, T. & SEGER, T. 1987. Hedging one’s evolutionary bets, revisited. TREE, 4: 41-44. 
PITT, F. 1938. Wild Animals in Britain. Batsford, London. 
REUTHER, C. 1980. Zur situation des fischotters in Europa. In: Der fischotters in Europa.Verebreitung bedrohung 
erhaltung,  (Edited by Reuther, C. & Festetics, A.C.) Pp. 71-92. Oderhaus and Göttingen, Selbstverlag. 


REUTHER, C. 1999. Development of weight and length of Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) cubs. I.U.C.N. Otter Specialist 
Group Bulletin, 16: 11-25. 
ROWBOTTOM, J & ROWBOTTOM, C.H. 1980. Watching otters in the Western Highlands of Scotland. Jotters, 6: 2. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J. 1964. Reproducción y observación des groupos de nutria (Lutra lutra L.)  en el norte de España. 
Miscellania Zoologica, 17: 225-229. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., LÓPEZ-MARTÍN, J.M. & PALAZÓN, S. 2001. The influence of fish abundance on the otter (Lutra 
lutra) populations in Iberian Mediterranean habitats. Journal of Zoology, London, 254: 325-336. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., MANAS, F. & BATET, A. 2005.  Breeding of otters (Lutra lutra L.) in the wild in the Mediterranean 
area.  In The Return of the Otter in Europe – where and how?  Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye, 30 June – 5 July 2003.  
(Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  International Otter Survival Fund, 
Broadford, Isle of Skye. 
SIDOROVICH, V.E. 1991. Structure, reproductive status and dynamics of the otter population in Byelorussia. Acta 
theriologica, 36: 153-161. 
SIDOROVICH, V.E. 1994. Reproduction of the otter population in Belarus: sexual cycle, fecundity, influence on factors. 
In: Seminar on the conservation of the European otter (Lutra lutra), Leeuwarden, Netherlands, June 1994. 
Environmental Encounters, No. 24: 105-106. Council of Europe, Strasbourg. 
SIDOROVICH, V.E. & TUMANOV, I.L.  1994.  Reproduction in otters in Belarus and north western Russia.  Acta 
Theriologica.  39.  59-66   
SINHA, V.R.P. & JONES, J.W. 1975. The European freshwater eel. Liverpool University Press, Liverpool. 
SOUTHWELL, T.H. 1872-73. The otter. Transactions of the Norfolk and Norwich Natural History Society, 1872-73: 79-
90. 
SOUTHWELL, T.H. 1877. On the breeding of the otter. Zoologist, 1: 172-174. 
STEPHENS, M. 1957. The otter report. Universities Federation of Animal Welfare, London. 
STUBBE, M. 1969.  Zur biologie und zum schutz des fischotters Lutra lutra (L.) Archiv fur Naturschutz und 
Landschaftsforchung.  9:  31-324 
SULKAVA, R.   2005.   Seasonal breeding of otters (Lutra lutra) in central Finalnd.  In The Return of the Otter in Europe 
– where and how?  Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye, 30 June – 5 July 2003.  (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., 
Gutleb, A. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye. 
TAYLOR, P.S. & KRUUK, H. 1990. A record of an otter (Lutra lutra) natal den. Journal of ZoologyLondon, 222: 689-
692. 
THESIGER, W. 1964. The Marsh Arabs. Pp. 166-167. Longman, London. 
TOWEILL, D.E. & TABOR, J.E. 1982. River otter. In: Wild animals of North America. (Edited by Chapman, J.A. & 
Feldhamer, G.A.) Pp. 688-703. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. 
TROWBRIDGE, B.J. 1983. Olfactory communication in the European otter (Lutra lutra). Ph.D. thesis. University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen. 
TUMANOV, I.L. & SIDOROVICH, V.E. 1994. Reproduction features and demography of the river otter (Lutra lutra L.). 
In: Seminar on the conservation of the European otter (Lutra lutra), Leeuwarden, Netherlands, June 1994. 
Environmental Encounters, No. 24: 107-109. Council of Europe, Strasbourg. 
VAN WIJNGAARDEN, A. & VAN DEN PEPPEL, J. 1970. De otter (Lutra lutra) in Nederland. Lutra, 12: 3-70. 
WAYRE, P. 1979. The Private Life of the Otter. Batsford, London. 
WEBER, J.M. 1990. Seasonal exploitation of amphibians by otter (Lutra lutra) in north east Scotland Journal of 
Zoology, London, 220: 641-651. 
YOSHIMURA, J. & CLARK, C.W. 1991. Individual adaptations in stochastic environments. Evolutionary Ecology, 5; 
173-192. 
 
 
 
 
 
