--- 
source: 2007 000n-22.pdf
--- 

PRELIMINARY STUDY OF OTTER (LUTRA LUTRA) PRINTS IN CAPTIVITY AS A 
TOOL FOR FIELD RESEARCH 
 
Laurent MERCIER1 and Guillaume FRIED 
 
1 Otter Re-introduction Centre (Centre de réintroduction des cigognes et des loutres), route de Ribeauvillé, 68 
150 Hunawihr, France 
email:  loutremercier@hotmail.com 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
If it is relatively easy to find otter indices, it is less obvious to individualise individual prints. 
This could contribute to our knowledge of otter populations in terms of ratio of animals or the 
size of territories. Nevertheless, prints can present different sizes depending on the way in 
which the otter has pushed its paw into the ground (depending on its weight) and according to 
the nature of the substrate. To examine this, an initial study was launched in the summer of 
2003 at the Breeding Centre of Otter (Lutra lutra) at Hunawihr. 
On the one hand, the aim of the study was to analyse the influence of the substrate on 
print size, while on the other, it was interesting to find a non-invasive and easy protocol to 
allow researchers to make conclusions on footprints in the field.  We hoped to obtain 
significant information on the sex and the age of the otter. 
 
 
2   MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Measurements were carried out on captive otters from the breeding and re-introduction Centre 
of Hunawihr. It is only at such breeding centres that precise and individual data can be 
obtained. Nine individuals (5 males and 4 females) were involved in the study and 
measurements were taken with a ruler on three types of substrate: snow, sand and mud. To 
obtain suitable prints, large vats were placed in the ground containing each substrate regularly 
humidified. They were placed in strategic places, where otters used to walk: along the fence, 
near the holt, etc. 
At the beginning of the study, forefeet and hind feet were measured, totalling 19 
measurements per print (Figure 1). 
 
- 
total width and length 
- 
length and width of the plantar ball 
- 
length of fingers 
- 
interfingers distances 
 


 
 
Figure 1. The 19 parameters measured for forefeet (FF) and hind feet (BF). 
 
Finally, 128 prints were measured (Table 1).  
 
Table 1.  Data relating to otter prints (origin of prints and its substrate) 
 
Number of prints 
Name 
Date of birth 
Sex 
snow 
mud 
sand 
TOTAL 
Forefeet (F) or Hind feet (B) 
F 
B 
F 
B 
F 
B 
F 
B 
Helvet 
01.06.92 
M 
0 
0 
0 
4 
0 
0 
0 
4 
Héroïne  
10.14.92 
F 
0 
0 
3 
14 
0 
0 
3 
14 
Lady 
10.23.95 
F 
0 
1 
0 
12 
0 
0 
0 
13 
Maquette 
08.22.99 
F 
0 
3 
6 
15 
0 
8 
6 
26 
Nautilus 
09.07.97 
M 
0 
6 
13 
16 
0 
2 
13 
24 
Obélix  
12.16.98 
M 
0 
0 
2 
6 
0 
0 
2 
6 
Orphée 
12.16.98 
F 
0 
5 
0 
4 
0 
0 
0 
9 
Rex 
09.10.88 
M 
0 
7 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
Titus 
or 
Twister 
04.14.02 
M 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
TOTAL 
0 
22 
24 
72 
0 
10 
24 
104 
 
For the analysis of individuals, the hind feet on mud were only used because they represented 
the most important data (56.25% of the whole prints). 
To check if a distinction between sexes or among individuals was possible, we used a 
discriminanting analysis of measurements using STATISTICA software. For each individual 
analysis we obtain a "classification function": 
 
Y = bo + b1X1 + b2X2 + … + biXi 
 
Where "X1, X2 … Xi" corresponds to the various measurements of the print in the 
field and "b1, b2 …, bi" are the discriminant coefficients. "b0" is a constant delivered by the 
software. 
The aim of this preliminary study was to find a well adapted method for field 
researchers. The statistical tool makes it possible to distinguish the most relevant parameters 
among the 19 used (Table 2). 


3   RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
3.1 Substrate influence 
 
Having taken many measurements of prints on three different substrates, particularly for two 
animals (Maquette and Nautilus), we could quantify the influence of soil on the individual 
print dimensions. 
The discriminant analysis showed that the dimensions were significantly different 
among substrates (Maquette: P = 0.0012 < 0.05 and Nautilus: P < 10-4 < 0.05). With 
important differences it is advisable to be extremely careful on the identification of the soil 
and its humidity. 
 
3.2 Sex determination 
 
Lutra lutra has a well-marked sexual dimorphism. Through individual weights it is possible to 
distinguish clearly the print of a male and female (P = 5.11E-19 < 0.05). The male hind foot has 
an average length of 89.4 millemetres and the female 73.3 millimetres.  
The discriminant analysis revealed the use of only seven parameters to estimate 
differences between male and female. 
 
Table 2.  Parameters conserved for the classification function. 
 
Parameters used 
Discriminating coefficients (b1,… bi) 
 
Male 
female 
Total length 
-10.2915888 
-7.94367027 
Total width 
1.78856003 
1.49818182 
Ball width 
-1.5458498 
-1.19685888 
Thumb length 
1.67097378 
1.34144676 
Forefinger length 
-1.23272276 
-1.00010705 
Middle finger length 
15.5776567 
12.5073814 
Little finger length 
1.52623034 
1.15367424 
Constant (b0) 
-317.205353 
-227.013809 
 
These parameters included in the classification function gave good results, 97.22% of the 
prints were accurately classified to the correct sex.  
Finally, when a hind print is found in mud, the discriminant function given in the first 
part of this paper with the included discriminanting coefficients given in Table 2 allows the 
distinction between sexes.  
To obtain the final result, you must calculate the difference between male and female 
with their proper discriminant coefficients. The print would be attributed to a male when the 
subtraction is positive and to a female when negative. The higher the absolute value is, the 
more its significance.  For example ("number*" are the measurements of a print taken for 
example): 
 
Y (YM - YF) = [(72.5*-10.2915888) + (55.83*1.,78856003) + (32.17*-1.5458498) 
+ (54.00*1.67097378) + (67.33*-1.23272276) + (72.67*15.5776567) + 
(56.00*1.52623034) – 317.205353] – [(72.5*-7.94367027) + (55.83*1.49818182) 
+ (32.17*-1.19685888) + (54.00*1.34144676) + (67.33*-1.00010705) + 
(72.67*12.5073814) + (56.00*1.15367424) – 227.013809] = - 9.32724729 
 


In this study case, the print belonged to a female. 
On the one hand, when a track is discovered, the mean value of each parameter for 
every print would give a more precise indication of the sex. On the other hand, when only one 
print is found, it is less obvious to obtain a perfect result due to the quality of the print which 
is rarely the same. 
One more difficulty is to distinguish a young male from an old female. The Breeding 
Centre of Hunawihr has no cubs younger than ten months old so it was not possible to 
determine the age limit at which the distinction first appears. Nevertheless, with Titus and 
Twister which were 15 months old during the study, we know that their prints had the same 
sizes than older males (Total length = 82 mm). 
 
3.3 Individualisation 
 
HERTWECK et al. (1998) obtained positive results for the individual identification of prints 
but it was only for snow tracks with sophisticated material (camera, expensive software…). 
But here we wanted to know if it was possible to identify individual prints particularly on 
mud with soft material. 
The discriminant analysis among individuals of the Hunawihr Breeding Centre is 
significant (p < 0.05) but this does not mean that each print found in the field could be 
attributed to a specific individual. Also, only 91.67% of the prints were correctly identified 
after testing. Figure 2 shows the canonical distribution and diversity of different prints for 
each individual. 
 
Helvet    
Héroïne   
Lady      
Maquette  
Nautilus  
Obélix    
Orphée    
Racin1 vs. Racin2
Racin1
Racin2
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
 
 
Figure 2.  Canonical distribution of seven otters prints. 
 
 
4   CONCLUSION 
 
This biometrical study based on otter print analysis delivered good indications on sex and 
weight of the individuals. On the other hand, the possibility of obtaining information allowing 
individualisation is compromised. 


The simple analysis of prints with a meter seems not to be sufficiently precise to 
distinguish prints of different individuals. Even if 92% of the data were correctly classified, 
8% of errors is a quite important percentage to promote a correct and precise otter population 
follow-up.  
The number of prints (4 to 16 per individual) and the number of individuals (4 females 
and 3 males) studied were too limited so the results in this unique breeding Centre could 
reflect genetical dispositions. 
Nevertheless, it would be very interesting to prolong this study to other breeding 
facilities. The development of this study and the increased level of sampling would surely 
make the results more precise and harden the conclusions. 
 
 
5   REFERENCES 
 
BANG P. & DAHLSTRÖM P., 1972. Guide des Traces d’Animaux. Delachaux et Niestlé, Lausanne-Paris. 264p. 
HERTWECK K., KLENKE R. &  HENLE K. 1998. Estimating the density of Otter (Lutra lutra) populations using 
individual analysis of tracks. VIIth International Otter Colloquium, Trebon. IUCN Otter Specialist Group 
Bulletin, 19A : 115-119. 
 
