--- 
source: 2007 000n-38.pdf
--- 

THE OTTER SITUATION IN SCANDINAVIA 2003 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE OTTER POPULATION IN NORWAY, SWEDEN, FINLAND 
AND DENMARK 
 
 Hanne CHRISTENSEN 
 
Sandåsveien 13a, 0956 Oslo, Norway.  email:   hann-c@online.no 
 
 
1   NORWAY   
Information from Thrine Heggberget and Hanne Christensen. 
 
1.1 Development and population size 
The otter population in Norway decreased early in the 20th century due to a harvest exceeding 
the annual recruitment to the population (up to 2,800 animals were harvested annually).  The 
population remained continuous in central and northern Norway and increased after their 
protection was introduced in 1982.  In southern Norway, however, the population was nearly 
extinct after 1950 and has not yet recovered.  The observed rate of population increase in 
central and northern Norway is estimated at approximately 10% per year.  A stagnation of the 
population in northern Norway was observed around 1995, but the population is spreading 
southwards along the coast.  At present otters are very common in central and northern 
Norway, particularly on the coast.  A rough, and uncertain, estimate of the Norwegian 
population indicates 10-15,000 animals around 1990 and 20,000 animals around 1995. 
 
The observed increase in the north western population has been estimated at around 
20% per year since 1990.  The population appears to have continued to increase and spread 
southwards in coastal areas up to now. 
 
An apparently well-established, but geographically limited breeding population in 
south eastern Norway is being monitored, but trends are not yet known. There is a trend to an 
increased number of otter tracks and other aspects of activity around this remnant population, 
at least as observed by winter tracking. 
 
1.2 Recolonisation and coalescing of the population 
The otter population is spreading southwards on the west coast and eastwards into the fjords 
and up rivers.  The front is not easily defined, however, a straight-line southerly movement of 
30–40 kilometres between 1990 and 2000 may be indicated (i.e. 3–4 km a year).  The 
recolonised area runs from Sognefjorden to Magerfjorden, just north of Bergen.  The 
recolonisation is rather slow and there is only one known breeding area outside the main-
distributional front. 
 
1.3 The reason for the decrease in the otter population 
The main reason for the decrease in the otter population in Norway in the early 1920s was 
over-hunting.  Later acidification of freshwaters, particularly in southern Norway caused 
losses of fish populations in many rivers and lakes.  There is no information on high levels of 
PCBs in Norwegian otters.  A sample of 200 animals from the Norwegian coast all showed 
PCB levels to be less than 30 ppm, with no reproductive failure in females.  These animals 
were sampled during the period 1978-92.  However no otters were received from southern 
Norway and it seems that we were too late to find out about the contamination situation in the 
southern Norwegian otter population.  However there is no reason to ignore PCBs as one of 
several reasons for the lack of recovery of the southern Norwegian otter population, which 
may also have suffered a demographic trap as they became too few. 


 
The areas south and east of the present otter distribution still have relatively high 
levels of pollutants in fish, particularly mercury, and this may be one of the reasons for the 
lack of a faster recolonisation of southern Norway. 
 
1.4  The reason for the increase of the otter population since 1985 
The protection of otters in 1982 was important, but liming and stocking with young fish in 
southern Norwegian freshwater areas may also be important. In addition, PCB disposal in 
central Europe and in Norway has been reduced. 
 
1.5   Management  
Since 1987, around 200 otters are found dead every year and sent to the Norwegian Institute 
for Nature Research in Trondheim.  Of these, 64% are killed by cars, while 26% are drowned 
in fishnets. 
 
Conflict in otter management arises from damage to coastal fish farms in particular.  
Good lasting solutions have not yet been found and so there is a need to:  
 
a) develop non-harmful technical solutions preventing damage to fish farms. 
b) improve the scientific basis for directives regulating the location of fish farms 
relative to otter activities. 
c) improve the scientific basis for removal of otters from fish farms. 
d) prohibit the use of  fyke nets around fish farm cages. 
e) establish fauna passages adapted for otters at otter path/road crossings 
f) introduce stop-grids in eel-traps to prevent otters from drowning in southern 
regions. 
g) prohibit the use of beaver traps in southern regions. 
h) survey the levels of  pesticides in otter habitats. 
 
 
2   SWEDEN   
Information from Mia Bisther and Thomas Sjøåsen  
 
2.1 Development and population size 
The otter population in Sweden is defined as ‘vulnerable’ in the Swedish Red List – that is to 
say the number of breeding animals is less then 1,000 individuals.  The otter population 
decreased dramatically in Sweden during the 20th century and they were protected in 1968.   
Numbers have increased only during the last ten years and the Swedish otter population is 
now estimated at 1,600–1,700 animals. 
 
The increase in the population is geographically uneven, with the stronger increase in 
the northern part of the country and a weak increase in the south.  Altogether the 
recolonisation is obvious but slow (50 years ago 1,000-1,500 otters were harvested annually 
in Sweden).  However, there are still huge areas in the country where otter surveys have not 
yet been performed and this may change the picture. 
 
2.2   The reason for the decrease since the 1950s in the otter population in Sweden 
The otter population in Sweden suffered a decline in numbers and range during the 1950s, due 
mainly to PCB contamination, but loss of habitat and acidification of freshwater also affected 
numbers.  PCB concentrations far exceeding tolerable levels were found in Swedish otters, 
especially during the 1970s and 1980s. 
 


2.3   The reason for the increase in the Swedish otter population during the last ten years 
The population is slowly recovering as PCB-levels in Swedish waters are continuously 
decreasing and wetlands are being restored and limed.  
 
 
3   FINLAND 
Information from Risto Sulkava 
 
3.1 Development and population size 
The last otter survey in Finland was performed during the years 1995-98 but the population 
has been monitored by wildlife triangle surveys of the Finnish Game and Fisheries Research 
Institute and by regional surveys, and the population was estimated by snow tracking.  The 
survey shows a clear recovery trend for the population and the species is now present all over 
Finland except for the islands of Åland.   The total Finish otter population is estimated to be 
about 2,000 animals. 
 
3.2  Recolonisation 
The species has returned to many southern and coastal areas where it had been absent 20 
years ago.  The densest population is found in the central part of the country, whilst the 
sparsest is in the southern part and in Lapland. 
 
3.3  The reason for the decrease in the population 
The population suffered from over-hunting in the first part of the 20th century.   From the 
1970s, the population was probably exposed to high PCB levels, as well as other possible 
toxic compounds.  
 
3.4  The reason for the increase in the otter population 
The prohibition of otter hunting and decreasing levels of PCBs in the environment are 
suggested as the main reasons for the recovery of the Finnish otter population.  As the 
population may still decline, the species continues to be defined as ‘vulnerable’ and is still 
protected although there is a pressure to permit hunting again. 
 
 
4   DENMARK 
Information from Morten Elmeros and Aksel Bo Madsen 
 
4.1 Development and population size 
According to the Danish national survey results from 1984-86, 1991, 1996 and an update in 
2000, the otter population in Denmark is increasing and spreading southwards in Jutland.  The 
national monitoring shows that the expansion started in the late 1980s when the species 
occurred only in the north western part of Jutland.  The Danish population is now considered 
to be between 800–1,000 animals.  
 
4.2  Recolonisation 
Over the past ten years, the otter has colonised both northern and eastern Jutland but the 
southern half of Jutland has seen an especially marked recovery.  The population front is 
moving at about ten kilometres a year.  The population on Sjælland is very small and hardly 
investigated. 


 
The introduction of four young otters in the southern front zone in 2000 proved very 
helpful in increasing the population trend southwards.  In fact, in 2003 otters were found 
further south, in a river system close to the border of Germany. 
 
4.3  The reason for the increase in the otter population 
 
1. Reduction in human-induced mortality by stop-grids on eel-traps to prevent otters 
from drowning and the establishment of 250 fauna passages adapted for otters at otter 
path/road crossings all over the country. 
2. Lowering of PCB and other pesticide contamination in the environment has improved 
the otters’ general health. 
3. The disposal of municipal wastewater and nutrients from agricultural industry has 
been considerably reduced. 
4. Physical maintenance of watersheds and wetland areas has improved the quality of 
otter habitats.  Since 1990 canalised watersheds have been restored to their original 
course and around 500-800 small lakes have been created annually. 
