--- 
source: 2007 000n-27.pdf
--- 

TRANSLOCATION OF EURASIAN OTTERS IN SWEDEN - A GENETIC EVALUATION 
 
Johanna ARRENDAL1, Christopher W. WALKER2, Anna-Karin SUNDQVIST2, Linda HELLBORG2, 
and Charles VILÀ2 
 
 
1.  Department of Animal Ecology, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18D, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. 
email: johanna.arrendal@ebc.uu.se  
2.  Department of Evolutionary Biology, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18D, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. 
 
 
Abstract. Through studies of genetic variation and differentiation of different Eurasian otter populations in 
Scandinavia we have evaluated the success of a translocation programme in southern Sweden. Even after the 
translocation, the genetic variation remains very low in southern Sweden. This suggests that the Norwegian 
otters used for the translocation may have made only local and limited contributions to the Swedish otter gene 
pool. The results of this study imply that the subsequent population growth may not have been as closely related 
to the translocation programme as initially suspected.  
 
Keywords: Conservation genetics, Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, microsatellites, mtDNA, re-introduction, 
restocking.  
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Re-introductions and translocations are common tools in conservation, but their success is not 
always properly evaluated (FISCHER AND LINDENMAYER, 2000; BREITENMOSER ET AL., 2001).  
The success can be indirectly assessed by comparing the genetic composition of the 
population before and after the translocation (ELLSWORTH ET AL., 1994; GREWE ET AL., 1994; 
LEBERG ET AL., 1994; LARGIADÈR AND SCHOLL, 1995; JONES, CLAY AND DANZMANN, 1996; 
NEDBAL ET AL., 1997; ROWE, BEEBEE AND BURKE., 1998; LEBERG AND ELLSWORTH, 1999).  In 
this study, we evaluate a translocation programme for Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) in Sweden. 
Between 1987 and 1992, 54 otters originating from Norway were released in two areas in 
southern Sweden (Figure 1; LARSSON AND EBENHARD, 1994; SJÖÅSEN, 1997). The 
translocation programme is regarded as successful (SJÖÅSEN, 1995; BREITENMOSER ET AL., 
2001), contributing to the subsequent population growth in southern Sweden (HAMMAR, 1996; 
SJÖÅSEN, 1996; BISTHER, 2000). However, it has not been clear to what extent the restocking 
has contributed to this growth. 
 
 
2   MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Six microsatellite loci (Lut717, 733, 818, 832, 833, and 902; DALLAS AND PIERTNEY, 1998; 
DALLAS ET AL., 1999) and the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) control region were analysed in 
114 otters, divided into six study populations (Figure 1). DNA was extracted from muscular 
tissue. One of the populations (N) consists of Norwegian otters included in the translocation 
programme. In southern Sweden, we differentiated the samples dating from before the 
translocation (SB) from those afterwards (SA1 and SA2). Only SA2 has been directly 
subjected to restocking (seven otters; Release site 2; Figure 1), but both SA1 and SA2 could 
be indirectly influenced by dispersals from Release site 1 (47 otters).  
Different genetic measures, such as expected (HE) and observed (HO) heterozygosities, 
and average number of alleles per locus for each population, were calculated using the 
program GENETIX (BELKHIR ET AL., 2000). Genetic differentiation between the populations 


under the infinite alleles model was calculated with the θ estimator (WEIR AND COCKERHAM, 
1984) of WRIGHT's (1965) FST, using GENETIX.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Populations of otters included in the study. Populations marked in grey were sampled after the release 
of otters from Norway. The release sites are indicated. 
 
 
3   RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The populations were all differentiated at microsatellite loci and, to a lesser extent, at mtDNA 
(Tables 1 & 2). As a result of this, we could genetically distinguish between Norwegian and 
Swedish otters and evaluate the genetic effect of the translocation. Otters from SA1 had low 
genetic diversity (Table 1), which is typical of a sharp population decline. The release of 
otters at Release site 1, north from SA1, has not resulted in new alleles or an increase in 
diversity. Instead, SA1 was most similar to the population before the releases (SB; Table 2). 
Our analyses reveal that SA2 may have been affected by the restocking. One allele 
was present in high frequency only in the Norwegian and SA2 population and, furthermore, 
mtDNA haplotype B was only present in these two populations (Table 1). The allelic diversity 
in SA2 was not as low as in SA1 (Table 1), perhaps as a result of new alleles from Norwegian 
otters. Although SA2 has diverged from the others (Table 2), it is still most similar to the 
population before the releases (SB; Table 2), suggesting limited effect of the releases. 
 
 
 


Table :. Sample size (N), Nei’s (1978) unbiased estimation of the expected heterozygosity (HE), observed 
heterozygosity (HO), average number of alleles per locus, distribution of mitochondrial DNA control region 
haplotypes and microsatellite allele 4 at locus Lut832 in the populations. 
Acronyms correspond to those in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unfortunately, no samples were available from the area around Release site 1 and, 
therefore, we were unable to determine the effect of the releases in this area. However, the 
absence of an increase in diversity or presence of Norwegian alleles in the neighbouring SA1 
indicates that the genetic consequences of the releases may be short-reaching. Consequently, 
our results suggest that the population growth in southern Sweden may not be as dependent 
on the releases as initially suspected. This suggestion is further supported by recorded 
population growth in areas more distant from the release sites (LÄNSSTYRELSEN GÄVLEBORG, 
1998; BISTHER, 2000). Together, these results indicate that the translocation programme has 
had a local and limited effect on the genetic composition of the population in southern 
Sweden.  
 
Table 2: Inter-population differentiation estimated by θ (Weir and Cockerham, 1984). Acronyms correspond to 
those in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
**Significantly different from 0 at P< 0.01. 
 
 
4   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This study is part of the more comprehensive paper by the same authors (Conservation 
Genetics 5: 79-88, 2004). Financial support was obtained from the Swedish Environmental 
Protection Agency and the World Wide Fund for Nature, WWF, in Sweden. 
 
 
5   REFERENCES 
BELKHIR, K., BORSA, P., CHIKHI, L., RAUFASTE, N. & BONHOMME, F. 2000. GENETIX 4.0, logicien sous 
Windows TM pour la génétique des populations. Laboratoire Génome, Populations, Interactions, CNRS UPR 
9060, Université de Montpelier II, Montpelier, France. 
BISTHER, M. 2000. Utter i Sydöstra Sverige – Inventering 2000. Föreningen Rädda Uttern i Småland.  
BREITENMOSER, U., BREITENMOSER-WÜRSTEN, C., CARBYN, L.N. & FUNK, S.M. 2001. Assessment of 
carnivore re-introductions. In: Carnivore Conservation (Edited by Gittleman, J.L., Funk, S.M.,Macdonald, D. & 
Wayne, R.K.) Pp. 241-281. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
Pop 
n 
HE 
HO 
N. 
alleles 
Haplotype A
No. of indiv 
Haplotype B 
No. of indiv 
Allele 4 
N 
20 
0.683 
0.715 
5.33 
17 
2 
0.225 
NS 
28 
0.745 
0.656 
6.17 
28 
0 
0.036 
CS 
23 
0.695 
0.696 
5.67 
23 
0 
0.022 
SB 
15 
0.694 
0.656 
4.83 
15 
0 
0.000 
SA2 
20 
0.613 
0.642 
3.67 
11 
6 
0.275 
SA1 
8 
0.451 
0.500 
2.50 
7 
0 
0.000 
 
N 
NS 
CS 
SB 
SA1 
SA2 
N 
- 
0.053** 
0.082** 
0.053** 
0.172** 
0.134** 
NS 
 
- 
0.065 
0.065** 
0.177** 
0.124** 
CS 
 
 
- 
0.039** 
0.133** 
0.126** 
SB 
 
 
 
- 
0.058** 
0.106** 
SA1 
 
 
 
 
- 
0.221 
SA2 
 
 
 
 
 
- 


DALLAS, J.F. & PIERTNEY, S.B. 1998. Microsatellite primers for the Eurasian otter. Molecular Ecology, 7: 
1247-1263. 
DALLAS, J.F., BACON, P.J., CARSS, D.N., CONROY, J.W.H., GREEN, R., JEFFERIES, D.J., KRUUK, H., 
MARSHALL, F., PIERTNEY, S.B. & RACEY, P.A. 1999. Genetic diversity in the Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, in 
Scotland. Evidence from microsatellite polymorphism. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 68: 73-86. 
ELLSWORTH, D.L., HONEYCUTT, R.L., SILVY, N.J., SMITH, M.H., BICKHAM, J.W. & KLIMSTRA, W.D. 1994. 
White-tailed deer restoration to the south eastern United States: evaluating genetic variation. Journal of Wildlife 
Management, 58: 686-697. 
FISCHER, J. & LINDENMAYER, D.B. 2000. An assessment of the published results of animal relocations. 
Biological Conservation, 96: 1-11. 
GREWE, P.M., KRUEGER, C.C., MARSDEN, J.E., AQUADRO, C.F. & MAY, B. 1994. Hatchery origins of 
naturally produced lake trout fry captured in Lake Ontario: temporal and spatial variability based on allozyme 
and mitochondrial DNA data. Transactions of the American Fish Society, 123: 309-320. 
HAMMAR, G. 1996. Inventering av Utter (Lutra lutra) i Uppland 1995. Rapport 1996:3. Norrtälje 
Naturvårdsfond, Norrtälje. 
JONES, M.W., CLAY, D., DANZMANN, R.G. 1996. Conservation genetics of brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis): 
population structuring in Fundy National Park, New Brunswick, and eastern Canada. Canadian Journal of 
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 53: 2776-2791. 
LARGIADÈR, C.R. & SCHOLL, A. 1995. Effects of stocking on the genetic diversity of brown trout populations 
of the Adriatic and Danubian drainages in Switzerland. Journal of Fish Biology, 47: 209-225. 
LARSSON, K. & EBENHARD, T. 1994. Isolerade Delpopulationer av Utter: en Sårbarhetsanalys. 
Världsnaturfonden WWF, Stockholm. 
LEBERG, P.L. & ELLSWORTH, D.L. 1999. Further evaluation of the genetic consequences of translocations on 
south eastern white-tailed deer populations. Journal of Wildlife Management, 63: 327-334. 
LEBERG, P.L., STANGEL, P.W., HILLESTAD, H.O., MARCHINTON, R.L. & SMITH, M.H. 1994. Genetic 
structure of re-introduced wild turkey and white-tailed deer populations. Journal of Wildlife Management, 58: 
698-711. 
LÄNSSTYRELSEN GÄVLEBORG. 1998. Uttern i Gävleborg Tio år Senare. Rapport 1998:11. Länsstyrelsen 
Gävleborg, Gävle. 
NEDBAL, M.A., HONEYCUTT, R.L., EVANS, S.G., WHITING, R.M. J.R. & DIETZ, D.R. 1997. Northern bobwhite 
restocking in east Texas: a genetic assessment. Journal of Wildlife Management, 61: 854-863. 
NEI, M. 1978. Estimation of average heterozygosity and genetic distance from a small number of individuals. 
Genetics, 89: 583-590.  
ROWE, G., BEEBEE, T.J.C. & BURKE, T. 1998. Phylogeography of the natterjack toad (Bufo calamita) in 
Britain: genetic differentiation of native and translocated populations. Molecular Ecology, 7: 751-760. 
SJÖÅSEN, T. 1995. Re-introduction of European otters in Sweden. IUCN Re-introduction News, 10: 10-11. 
SJÖÅSEN, T. 1996. Utterinventering i Södermanland 1996. Zoologiska institutionen, Stockholms universitet, 
Stockholm. 
SJÖÅSEN, T. 1997. Movements and establishment of re-introduced European otters (Lutra lutra). Journal of 
Applied Ecology, 34: 1070-1080. 
WEIR, B.S. & COCKERHAM, C.C. 1984. Estimating F-statistics for the analysis of population structure. 
Evolution 38: 1358-1370. 
WRIGHT, S. 1965. The interpretation of population structure by F-statistics with special regard to systems of 
mating. Evolution, 19: 395-420. 
