--- 
source: 2007-3.pdf
--- 

MAMMALIAN SPECIES
No. 671, pp. 1–6, 3 ﬁgs.
Aonyx capensis.
By Serge Larivie`re
Published 5 June 2001 by the American Society of Mammalogists
FIG. 1.
Adult Aonyx capensis. Photograph courtesy of Mi-
chael J. Somers.
Aonyx (Lesson, 1827)
Aonyx Lesson, 1827:157. Type species Aonyx delalandi Lesson
(5 Lutra capensis Schinz).
Anahyster Murray, 1860:157. Type species Anahyster calabaricus
Murray (5 Lutra capensis Schinz).
Paraonyx Hinton, 1921:195. Type species Paraonyx philippsi
Hinton.
CONTEXT AND CONTENT. Order Carnivora, family Mus-
telidae, subfamily Lutrinae. The genus Aonyx is monophyletic and
phylogenetically linked to the New World otters (Lontra—van Zyll
de Jong 1987), with Paraonyx recognized as a valid subgenus (Ell-
erman et al. 1953). Exactly which species should be included in
the genus Aonyx is not resolved. For example, the Asian small-
clawed otter (Amblonyx cinerea) is often included in the genus
Aonyx (Chanin 1985; Foster-Turley et al. 1990), but recent phy-
logenetic analyses suggest that the generic distinction between
Aonyx and Amblonyx is not warranted (Koepﬂi and Wayne 1998).
Within Aonyx, the Congo clawless otter (A. congicus) is often con-
sidered under A. capensis (Davis 1978). However, Wozencraft
(1993) recognizes 2 species: A. capensis and A. congicus.
Aonyx capensis (Schinz, 1821)
Cape Clawless Otter
Lutra capensis Schinz, 1821:214. Type locality ‘‘Cape of Good
Hope.’’
Lutra inunguis Cuvier, 1823:247. Type locality ‘‘Cape of Good
Hope.’’
Aonyx delalandi Lesson, 1827:157. Type locality ‘‘Cape of Good
Hope.’’
CONTEXT AND CONTENT. Generic context given above.
Aonyx capensis is monotypic.
DIAGNOSIS. The Cape clawless otter can be differentiated
from the sympatric spotted-necked otter (Lutra maculicollis) by its
larger size (ca. 12–18 kg), greater length (ca. 950 mm), paler color,
lack of spotted markings on neck and throat, long vibrissae, lack
of webbing on feet, and lack of claws on toes (Roberts 1951; Rowe-
Rowe 1978a, 1985). The water mongoose (Atilax paludinosus) is
gray to reddish-brown as opposed to the dark brown dorsum and
creamy white underparts of A. capensis (Turnbull-Kemp 1960a).
The Congo clawless otter (A. congicus) is similar in color, but
smaller in size and more slender, especially in the head and neck
region (Kingdon 1997). Furthermore, the 2 Aonyx species are sym-
patric only in Rwanda and Uganda, where they do not share the
same habitats (Baranga 1995; Rowe-Rowe 1986, 1995).
GENERAL CHARACTERS. The Cape clawless otter (Fig.
1) is the largest of the Old World otters (Turnbull-Kemp 1960a)
and the 3rd largest of all otters (Estes 1991) after the giant otter
(Pteronura brasiliensis) and the sea otter (Enhydra lutris). Body
is massive and the tail is stout (Turnbull-Kemp 1960a). Upper lips,
sides of face, neck, throat, belly, and edge of ears are white (Skin-
ner and Smithers 1990). Eyes and ears are small and rounded
(Dorst and Dandelot 1970; Eyre 1963). Vibrissae are white to gray
and occur on both upper and lower jaw (Tayler 1970).
Coat is dense and lustrous. Guard hairs reach 25 mm in mid-
back, but are shorter (ca. 10 mm) on head and tail (Skinner and
Smithers 1990). Underfur is white to off-white in color, hairs are
wrinkled and much ﬁner than guard hairs. Skin is thick (Skinner
and Smithers 1990).
Toes are clawless, except for digits 2, 3, and 4 of hind feet,
which bear small grooming claws (Davis 1978). Hind feet are par-
tially webbed, but front feet are not (Skinner and Smithers 1990).
A. capensis has the least interdigital webbing of all otters (Davis
1978). Undersides of feet are hairless, and thumb is opposable
(Rowe-Rowe 1978a).
Average measurements (mm), with parenthetical ranges of 7
males and 2 females, respectively, from the Cape province in South
Africa (Stuart 1981), are as follows: length of head and body, 829
(762–880), 733 (730–736); length of tail, 487 (465–515), 500
(495–515); length of hind foot, 152 (130–170), 135 (130–139);
length of ear, 31 (23–35), 28 (28–29). In the Cape Province, mean
body mass (kg), with parenthetical ranges of 7 males and 3 females,
is 15.1 (11.5–21.0) and 12.9 (10.6–14.2), respectively (Stuart
1981). Mean body mass (kg) and parenthetical ranges and sample
sizes of adult males and females, respectively, are: 12.3 (10.0–15.4,
9) and 14.3 (12.3–16.3, 2) in Zimbabwe (Smithers 1983) and 13.7
(10.0–17.8, 13) and 11.9 (11.0–13.0, 3) in Tsitsikama National
Park (Skinner and Smithers 1990). One male and 1 female from
Natal weighed 16.4 and 11.8 kg, respectively (Rowe-Rowe 1978b).
Skull (Fig. 2) is massive, and brain is large relative to body
(Sheppey and Bernard 1984). Cranium is broad and ﬂattened,
broadest at ears and tapering sharply at interparietal constriction.
Eye orbits are relatively small; rostrum is broad and short; zygo-
matic arches are thin and lightly built. A small sagittal crest is
present (Skinner and Smithers 1990). Greatest length of skulls
(mm) and parenthetical ranges for 7 male and 2 females, respec-
tively, from Cape Province, South Africa, averaged 138 (134–144)
and 131 (128–134—Stuart 1981). Mean skull measurements (mm)
and parenthetical ranges for 3 adult males and 3 adult females,
respectively, from South Africa are: greatest length of skull, 133.5
(131.5–136), 130.9 (125–134); basilar length, 120.3 (118–122),
118.3 (112–122); zygomatic breadth, 98.8 (95.5–101.5), 92.7 (91–
96); mastoid breadth, 96.7 (92.5–99.7), 90.6 (86–93.5); interorbital
constriction, 32.9 (31.7–34.8), 29.3 (28.5–30.5); intertemporal con-
striction, 28.5 (27–30), 27.5 (26.5–28—Roberts 1951).
DISTRIBUTION. The Cape clawless otter occurs from
South Africa northward to Ethiopia in the east and Senegal in the
west (Fig. 3). The Cape clawless otter is common in Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, Malawi, Mozambique, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania,
Zaire, Zambia, and Zimbabwe; rare in Angola, Benin, Botswana,
Burkina Faso, Chad, Guinea-Biaau, Ivory Coast, Sierra Leone, Swa-
ziland, and Uganda; and very rare in Central African Republic,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Lesotho, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, and Rwanda
(Avenant 1997; Crawford-Cabral 1989; Pringle 1977; Rowe-Rowe
1990a, 1990b; Smithers 1966). A. capensis is absent from the cen-
tral African rainforest region of the Congo basin where A. congicus
occurs. The status of the Cape clawless otter in Gambia, Mali,


2
MAMMALIAN SPECIES
671—Aonyx capensis
FIG. 2.
Dorsal, ventral, and lateral views of cranium and lat-
eral view of mandible of Aonyx capensis from Kenya (female, Royal
Ontario Museum 38431). Greatest length of cranium is 128.5 mm.
FIG. 3.
Distribution of Aonyx capensis in Africa; modiﬁed
from Rowe-Rowe (1990b, 1995) and Rowe-Rowe and Somers
(1998).
Sudan, and Togo is unknown (Rowe-Rowe 1990a, 1990b, 1995).
Both species of Aonyx are sympatric in Rwanda and Uganda
(Rowe-Rowe 1986).
FOSSIL RECORD. The earliest known species of otter, Po-
tamotherium valetoni, occurred in the upper Oligocene of Europe
(Savage 1957; van Zyll de Jong 1972). ‘‘Lutra’’ hessica appears in
the European Pliocene (van Zyll de Jong 1972) and is possibly the
1st member of the genus Aonyx (Pohle 1919). In the Upper Plio-
cene of Europe, ‘‘Lutra’’ bavarti is recorded and is also considered
a member of the genus Aonyx based on the M1 which is broadened
as in recent Aonyx (van Zyll de Jong 1972). In the Upper Pliocene
of China, ‘‘Lutra’’ aonychoides shows many similarities with the
Recent Aonyx (Teilhard de Chardin and Leroy 1945; van Zyll de
Jong 1972). A. capensis is 1st recorded from the Pleistocene at
Swartklip, Florisbab, and Gamble’s sites (Hopwood and Hollyﬁeld
1954; Savage 1978), and fossils have been found in northern,
southern, and eastern Africa in sites away from the coast (Savage
1978).
In Africa, the history of the Lutrinae is not well known. The
Lutrinae probably reached Africa in the Pliocene, but most of the
ancestral forms cannot be linked to current forms. Based on the
specialization of the dentition for crushing instead of shearing, A.
capensis is probably more recent than its sympatric counterpart L.
maculicollis (van Zyll de Jong 1972). Aonyx and Amblonyx prob-
ably diverged from the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) about 6.3–8.0
million years ago, and diverged from each other 5 million years ago
(Koepﬂi and Wayne 1998).
FORM AND FUNCTION. Aonyx capensis is a specialist
for feeding on crabs (Rowe-Rowe 1986). Its large molars, powerful
jaws, and lack of cutting teeth are well adapted for crushing crus-
tacean carapaces and skull bones of large ﬁsh (Rowe-Rowe 1977a).
In Africa, molariform teeth of A. capensis vary geographically with
the size of molluscs and crustaceans (Davis 1978).
Aonyx capensis has dexterous forefeet, which can also detect
prey by touch (Kingdon 1977). Rough skin on palms and ﬁngers
enables Cape clawless otters to grasp slippery ﬁsh and frogs se-
curely (Smithers 1971). Long vibrissae are used to detect movement
of prey in murky water (Rowe-Rowe 1977b). Food passage for A.
capensis is ca. 3 h (van der Zee 1982).
Males have a well-developed baculum. Prepuce is pendulous,
not haired, and anterior to scrotum (Estes 1991). Although prepuce
protrudes well beyond ventral hair, body of penis lies completely
sheathed under the skin (Davis 1978). Females possess 2 pairs of
abdominal mammae (Roberts 1951).
Cape clawless otters possess a pair of anal glands which may
serve for scent-marking (Smithers 1971). Scats of Aonyx capensis
can be differentiated from those of Lutra maculicollis by their
greater diameter: scats of A. capensis average (6SD) 25.5 6 2.4
mm (n 5 185), whereas scats of L. maculicollis average (6SD)
14.6 6 2.1 mm (n 5 85—Rowe-Rowe 1992).
ONTOGENY AND REPRODUCTION. Copulation may
occur during December (Verwoerd 1987), but births have been re-
ported in most months, with a possible peak during the dry season
south of the equator (Rowe-Rowe 1978a, 1978b). In KwaZulu-Na-
tal, South Africa, parturition occurs at the end of August (Rowe-
Rowe 1978b), which coincides with the start of the rainy season in
this summer rainfall area. Along the coast of South Africa, where
the rainy season is in winter, parturition occurs from December to
February (Verwoerd 1987).
Gestation is 63 days, and litter size is 1–3 (Rowe-Rowe
1978a). Young are born with pale, smoky-gray, woolly fur (Kingdon
1997; Rowe-Rowe 1985). Two young otters (sex unknown) ,1 week
old weighed 260 g each (Rowe-Rowe 1978b), whereas a pair of 14-
day-old cubs (sex unknown) weighed 700 and 1,400 g, respectively
(Chanin 1985). Between 8 and 16 weeks of age, Cape clawless otter
cubs gain weight at a rate of 330 g per week (Chanin 1985).


MAMMALIAN SPECIES
3
671—Aonyx capensis
Eye opening occurs after 16–30 days, after which cubs venture
outside of the den (Chanin 1985; Smithers 1971). Weaning occurs
at 45–60 days (Harris 1968). Young become independent and reach
sexual maturity after 1 year (Verwoerd 1987).
ECOLOGY. Although most populations occur in freshwater,
some populations may occupy the sea coast (Rowe-Rowe 1990b;
Shortridge 1934). Unlike true marine mammals, Cape clawless ot-
ters must drink freshwater and, accordingly, live near springs or
rivers (Tayler 1970; van Niekerk et al. 1998). Cape clawless otters
are found in major river systems, many minor water courses, and
also in many nonperennial streams and small reservoirs (Stuart
1981). A. capensis makes extensive use of reed-beds (Phragmites
and Typha) and prefers shallow over deep water (Rowe-Rowe
1977a; Stuart 1981).
In freshwater habitats, diet of the Cape clawless otter com-
prises primarily crabs (Potamonautes), frogs, insects, and ﬁsh (But-
ler 1994; Donnelly and Grobler 1976; Kruuk and Goudswaard
1990; Ligthart et al. 1994; Purves et al. 1994; Rowe-Rowe 1977a;
Somers and Purves 1996; Turnbull-Kemp 1960b). Although crabs
dominate the diet in all localities (42–65% relative occurrence),
percentage of other items in diet varies locally or seasonally, and
depends on prey availability (Rowe-Rowe and Somers 1998). Typ-
ically, A. capensis consumes more ﬁsh during winter (10–30% oc-
currence) than in summer (0–10%—Rowe-Rowe 1977a). Fish con-
sumed by Cape clawless otters include Amphilius uranoscopus,
Anguilla bengalensis, Barbus anoplus, B. natalensis, Lepomis
macrochirus, Micropterus dolomieu, M. punctatus, M. salmoides,
Salmo trutta, and Tilapia sparrmanii (Purves et al. 1994; Rowe-
Rowe 1977a). In Zimbabwe, introduced rainbow trout (Oncorhyn-
chus mykiss) composed only 1% of the diet (Butler and du Toit
1994), and in KwaZulu-Natal, most introduced trout that were eaten
(88%) were ,200 mm in length (Rowe-Rowe 1977a).
In coastal waters of the Cape province, A. capensis captured
50% ﬁsh (n 5 64 successful dives), 28% crabs, 11% Cape rock
lobsters (Jasus lalandii), and 6% abalone (Haliotis midae—Som-
ers 2000). In a marine habitat in Tsitsikama Coastal National Park,
South Africa, the diet of A. capensis consists mostly of red rock
crab (Plagusia chabrus), brown rock crab (Cyclograpsus puncta-
tus), Cape rock lobster, octopus (Octopus granulatus), frogs (Xen-
opus), and ﬁsh (Rowe-Rowe 1977a, 1985; van der Zee 1981; Ver-
woerd 1987). In Betty’s Bay, South Africa, the Cape clawless otter
ate mostly ﬁsh (59% of biomass consumed), crustaceans (24%), and
octopus (15%—Verwoerd 1987). Although A. capensis at Betty’s
Bay consumes more ﬁsh and lobster and fewer crabs, the foraging
behavior of Cape clawless otters in both locations was similar (Ver-
woerd 1987).
Predation on waterfowl is rare (Rowe-Rowe 1978a), but in
winter, Cape clawless otters may kill domestic ducks, geese, coots,
or swans (Rowe-Rowe 1978b; Stuart 1981). Although abundant in
many water bodies, bivalves and snails are apparently rarely eaten
by Cape clawless otters (Smithers 1971). Other items consumed
include dragonﬂy larvae (Anax imperator), other insects (Coprinae,
Cyclorhapha, Dytiscidae, Nepidae, Odonota, and Scarabaeidae),
molluscs, reptiles, small birds, and very rarely mammals (Croci-
dura and Otomys) or seaweeds (Donnelly and Grobler 1976; Rowe-
Rowe 1977a).
In freshwater habitats of southwestern Tanzania, 3 distinct
groups occupied a 5-km stretch of river (Kingdon 1997). In marine
habitats of coastal South Africa, minimum home ranges of 1 female
and 1 male A. capensis were estimated at 14.4 (core area 5 7.5
km) and 19.5 km (core area 5 12.0 km) of coastline, respectively
(Arden-Clarke 1986). Home ranges of males and females overlap
(Arden-Clarke 1986; van der Zee 1982), and temporal instead of
spatial avoidance may occur (van der Zee 1982). Nightly move-
ments may reach 13 km (Tayler 1970), and males are believed to
move longer distances than females (van der Zee 1982).
Density of A. capensis in marine habitats varies from 2 to 7
otters (adult and juveniles combined) per 10 km of coastline (Ar-
den-Clarke 1986; van der Zee 1982; Verwoerd 1987). In ideal
freshwater habitats, densities of A. capensis may reach 1 otter per
3–4 km of stream (Rowe-Rowe 1992). In Zimbabwe, densities of
A. capensis were 1 otter per 8–10 km of stream: the low density of
otters probably reﬂected the low abundance of river crabs (Butler
and du Toit 1994).
Aonyx capensis may compete with the sympatric spotted-
necked otter, Lutra maculicollis. However, L. maculicollis is more
dependent on permanent bodies of clear water and is better adapted
for capturing ﬁsh, whereas A. capensis eats primarily crabs and
frogs (Rowe-Rowe 1977a, 1977b, 1986; Somers and Purves 1996).
Thus, segregation in diet and foraging ecology allows these 2 spe-
cies to coexist (Rowe-Rowe 1977a, 1977b; Somers and Purves
1996).
Aonyx capensis is also sympatric with the water mongoose
(Atilax paludinosus). Both species exhibit 58–66% overlap in their
diet, but the water mongoose has a broader diet, is more terrestrial,
and seldom ventures far from shore or into deep water (Rowe-Rowe
1977a). Cape clawless otters consume a wider range of crab sizes,
a larger proportion of ﬁsh, and a smaller proportion of terrestrial
prey compared with water mongooses (Purves et al. 1994; Rowe-
Rowe 1977a; Rowe-Rowe and Somers 1998; Somers and Purves
1996). Thus, competition between water mongooses and Cape claw-
less otters is likely not a limiting factor restricting the distribution
of either species (Purves et al. 1994).
Crocodiles (Crocodilus niloticus) and ﬁsh-eagles (Haliaetus
vocifer) may kill Cape clawless otters (Kingdon 1977; Kruuk and
Goudswaard 1990; Lejeune and Frank 1990). However, most mor-
tality is inﬂicted by humans (van der Zee 1982). Cape clawless
otters can be captured with cage traps, poisoned baits attached to
live crabs, or foothold traps baited with crabs (Turnbull-Kemp
1960a). Although A. capensis may be accidentally captured in ﬁsh
nets, such incidents are rare (Smith 1993). Roadkills may cause
occasional deaths of Cape clawless otters (Verwoerd 1987). Lon-
gevity in captivity is .13 years.
Endoparasites include trematodes Baschkirovitrema incras-
satum, Clinostomum pyriforme, and Prudhoella rhodesiensis and
the nematode Cloeoascaris spinicollis (Round 1968). No ectopar-
asites are known.
BEHAVIOR. In freshwater habitats, Cape clawless otters are
primarily solitary but on occasion may travel as family groups of 2
adults and 2 to 3 young (Rowe-Rowe 1978a). In coastal populations
of South Africa, most observations (78%, n 5 124) were of single
otters, whereas groups of 2, 3, and 4 comprised 12%, 9%, and 1%
of observations, respectively (van der Zee 1982). On occasion,
groups of males may forage together in a clan-type organization
(Arden-Clarke 1986).
The Cape clawless otter is mainly crepuscular (Rowe-Rowe
1978a, 1978b; Verwoerd 1987). During the day, Aonyx capensis
shelters in underground burrows, under rocks, under roots of trees,
or in dense vegetation on islands (Arden-Clarke 1986; Rowe-Rowe
1978a, 1978b). In sandy soil, Cape clawless otters may dig their
own burrows that may reach 3 m in depth. Some burrows have
several entrances either above or below water, and tunnel length
varies from 1.9 to 2.9 m (Rowe-Rowe 1978a, 1992). About 50% of
dens are dug by A. capensis, whereas the other 50% are depres-
sions in the ground (Rowe-Rowe 1992). The opening of excavated
burrows is typically elliptical, and width and height of 8 burrows
(mean 6 SD) was 361 6 85 mm and 246 6 32 mm, respectively
(Rowe-Rowe 1992). Dens may have a number of saucer-shaped
depressions 30–40 cm in diameter and 2–3 cm deep, usually lo-
cated under thick brush and interconnected by trails and tunnels
(Verwoerd 1987). All burrows contain a nest of grass or other veg-
etation (Rowe-Rowe 1992).
Dens of Cape clawless otter from the coast of South Africa
were typically near an abundant food supply, near bushy areas, near
(,15 m) fresh water, and never located .50 m from shore (van der
Zee 1982; van Niekerk et al. 1998). Density was 2.1 dens/km of
coastline (Arden-Clarke 1986). In addition, each den location had
several rolling places, where Cape clawless otters dried their fur,
as well as numerous sprainting sites. Average use of all den sites
(n 5 65) from the Tsitsikama Coastal National Park was 32%, and
each site was visited on average every 3 days (van der Zee 1982).
Distance between den sites averaged 1.0 km, but varied from 0.3
to 2.4 km (van der Zee 1982). Dens may be used by numerous
Cape clawless otters (Arden-Clarke 1986).
Cape clawless otters have an elaborate vocal repertoire that
includes 4 main vocalizations: 2 whistles (1 low-pitched and 1 high-
pitched), a grunt, and a variable ‘‘Hah!’’ to express anxiety (Davis
1978; Rowe-Rowe 1978a). In addition, growls and snarls may be
emitted as threats, and humming may be used as a begging call
(Maxwell 1963). In captivity, a wailing ‘‘wow-wow-wow’’ or ‘‘ow-ow-
ow’’ is an expression of appreciation or displeasure if accompanied
with snarls. Other sounds may include squeals, moaning, mewing,


4
MAMMALIAN SPECIES
671—Aonyx capensis
and snufﬂing noises (Maxwell 1963). The basic contact call of ju-
veniles is a high-pitched ‘‘whee’’ or squeaky ‘‘whee-whee’’ (Maxwell
1960).
After hunting, Cape clawless otters emerge from the water, roll
on grass or sand, usually defecate, then spend time, sometimes a
few hours, lying in or near cover, resting or sleeping before re-
entering the water or moving somewhere else. A. capensis dries and
grooms its fur by rolling and rubbing against inanimate objects.
Rolling occurs mostly in grass but may also occur on sandbars,
earth ledges, and ﬂat rocks. Scent-marking may occur during roll-
ing (Rowe-Rowe 1978b, 1992). After rubbing and rolling, otters
often bask in the sun (Turnbull-Kemp 1960a). Latrines are found
near rolling places (Rowe-Rowe 1978a), and the most frequently
used spraint sites occur near dens (Rowe-Rowe 1992). The mean
distance (m, 6SD) of spraints to water is 4.2 6 3.2 (n 5 135,
range 1–15). Most feces (85%) were 1–7 m from water, and the
15% that were 10–15 m from water were between a river and an
oxbow or on large islands (Rowe-Rowe 1992). In coastal areas,
spraints occur mostly on rocks and boulders and ,50 m from a
freshwater source (van Niekerk et al. 1998). Spraint sites are ap-
parently used more intensively in the spring, possibly linked to the
breeding season (Rowe-Rowe 1992). When defecating, A. capensis
often straddles its back legs and expels both urine and feces back-
wards (Eyre 1963; Tayler 1970). Scats are sticky enough to adhere
to vertical structures (Eyre 1963).
Cape clawless otters are awkward on land and either walk
slowly or employ a seal-like trot (Rowe-Rowe 1985). Order in which
feet are placed on ground is right hindfoot, left front foot, left hind-
foot, and right front foot (van der Zee 1982). Tail can either be
carried off the ground with tip curving upward (Eyre 1963) or
dragged on the ground, leaving a distinct trail (Tayler 1970). Tail
is also used as a tripod when sitting up (Tayler 1970). On land, A.
capensis carries objects or prey by holding them against the chest
with 1 front paw while hobbling on 3 legs (Rowe-Rowe 1985).
When transporting cubs, females may hold offspring using both
front feet, and then hobble on their back legs. Travel on land is
minimal, and A. capensis uses regular trails representing the short-
est distance between water bodies (Rowe-Rowe 1978b, 1985). Oc-
casionally, overland travel may reach up to 7 km (M. J. Somers, in
litt.).
When swimming, A. capensis uses its hind legs for propulsion
and its tail as a rudder for direction (Rowe-Rowe 1978b, 1985).
Cape clawless otters also use side thrusts from their strong tail to
aid swimming (Carter 1956). Locomotion in water may be a series
of long underwater dives or surface swimming with the head ex-
posed above water (Rowe-Rowe 1978a, 1978b, 1985).
When hunting, swimming animals dive straight down or at a
slight angle, raising the body out of the water at ﬁrst, then curving
sharply and going directly to the bottom. Cape clawless otters may
swim on the surface, dive underwater, and emerge still swimming
in the same direction (Somers 2000). When hunting underwater, A.
capensis emerges from 1 to 10 m from their diving point. Hunting
dives last 17–21 s on average, but vary from 1 to 48 s (Rowe-Rowe
1977b; Somers 2000; Verwoerd 1987). Dives in deep water last
longer than dives in shallower water (Verwoerd 1987). One adult
observed diving 37 consecutive times was successful in obtaining
prey during 23 dives (Rowe-Rowe 1977b). Hunting bouts last be-
tween 5 and 181 min (Rowe-Rowe 1977b; Somers 2000; Verwoerd
1987). Cape clawless otters eat small prey while swimming and
hold the prey with the forefeet. Large prey are taken to shore for
consumption (Rowe-Rowe 1977b).
In coastal waters, Cape clawless otters moved along the shore-
line while hunting. Average foraging speed was 21.4 m/min (n 5
5, range 8.3–34.1 m/min), and A. capensis were never observed
.40 m from shoreline (Somers 2000). In coastal waters of the Cape
province, A. capensis preferred hunting in water ,1.5 m deep
(Somers 2000).
When hunting in shallow water, Cape clawless otters immerse
their heads underwater and scan for prey while constantly feeling
under rocks with their forefeet (Rowe-Rowe 1977b, 1977c; Somers
2000; Verwoerd 1987). Once prey is sensed, Cape clawless otters
move rapidly and prey is captured following a direct chase. Most
prey are captured by the forefeet then bitten (Rowe-Rowe 1977b).
Crabs may be eaten while the Cape clawless otter maintains
an upright position in the water. When consuming large crabs, Cape
clawless otters usually consume the chelae and limbs ﬁrst and tilt
their heads back while chewing. Pieces that fall out of the mouth
are caught against the chest with the forefeet (Rowe-Rowe 1977b).
Freshwater mussels (Aspatharia wahlbergi) with shells that
are too hard for otters to crush with their jaws may be opened by
smashing on nearby rocks (Donnelly and Grobler 1976). However,
Cape clawless otters were not observed to perform this behavior,
and evidence for this behavior was based on tracks (Donnelly and
Grobler 1976). Most likely, tracks of A. capensis were confused
with those of Atilax paludinosus, a species that frequently uses
anvils for opening mussels (Baker 1989; Rowe-Rowe 1978b).
Fish are captured in proportion to their swimming abilities,
and smaller ﬁsh are captured more easily than larger ones (Rowe-
Rowe 1977c). Fish are more easily captured during winter, when
the cold temperature reduces their activity, and in clear instead of
murky water (Rowe-Rowe 1977c). When a ﬁsh is spotted, A. ca-
pensis immediately gives chase, surfacing only brieﬂy to breathe.
Dives for ﬁsh last 18 s and range from 6 to 49 s (n 5 389—Rowe-
Rowe 1977b). Fish are grabbed with the forefeet or bitten while
swimming. Once successful, the Cape clawless otter immediately
bites the head. Fish are consumed in water, but only small (,80
mm) ﬁsh are consumed while A. capensis maintains an upright
position. Larger ﬁsh are taken to shallow water or to shore (Somers
2000). Most species of ﬁsh, as well as amphibians, are eaten head
ﬁrst (Rowe-Rowe 1977b).
Prey are consumed as soon as they are captured. Captive Cape
clawless otters may store food in their sleeping box and later take
their prey to water for consumption. When transporting prey in
water, Cape clawless otters hold prey by the forefeet or occasionally
in the mouth (Rowe-Rowe 1977b). In captivity, 1 Cape clawless
otter grabbed most dead ﬁsh with the right forefoot (50/80 trials)
or both forefeet (30/80 trials—Rowe-Rowe 1977b). This same in-
dividual placed food into its mouth equally often with the right
forefoot or both forefeet (Rowe-Rowe 1977b).
In captivity, A. capensis captured birds using its forefeet and
subsequently killed the prey by biting the head. Birds offered in
captivity were almost entirely eaten, including feathers. In captivity,
eggs were left untouched by captive A. capensis, and the sight of
terrestrial prey such as rats did not elicit predatory behavior (Rowe-
Rowe 1977b).
Hunting efﬁciency of Cape clawless otters foraging for crabs
and frogs is not affected by water temperature, stony substrate,
water clarity, or darkness (Rowe-Rowe 1977c). However, ﬁsh-catch-
ing efﬁciency is affected by water temperature and clarity, with
colder and clearer water facilitating prey capture (Rowe-Rowe
1977c). Cape clawless otters do not hunt in deep water and are
therefore restricted by steep coastlines (Verwoerd 1987).
After eating, the Cape clawless otter cleans its face and feet.
On dry land, food may be dunked in water before being eaten.
After feeding, a captive female in Botswana washed her hands,
dunked her head in water, then swam for a few minutes before
returning to the food dish (Smithers 1971).
Play is common in young animals and involves play-ﬁghting,
romping, sliding, and manipulation of inanimate objects or dead
prey (Maxwell 1960; Rowe-Rowe 1978a). Play may also involve
dropping a pebble or small rock in the water and retrieving it before
it reaches the bottom (Harris 1968) or diving with a ﬂoating object,
releasing it underwater, and watching it ﬂoat to the surface (Smith-
ers 1971).
The Cape clawless otter may use its tail to scoop objects within
reach of its forefeet (Maxwell 1960) or for defense (Tayler 1970).
Fighting occurs rarely (Tayler 1970), but Cape clawless otters are
ﬁerce when cornered. When attacked on land, Cape clawless otters
head for water (Tayler 1970). When brought to bay, Cape clawless
otters can drag large dogs underwater and drown them (Harris
1968). When pursued by marine predators, A. capensis will head
for land (M. J. Somers, in litt.).
When captured at an early age, Cape clawless otters can be
tamed easily (Eyre 1963; Shortridge 1934). However, some Cape
clawless otters remain unpredictable as pets and may bite without
any apparent reason (Maxwell 1963). Captive A. capensis show no
inclination for digging (Smithers 1971).
CONSERVATION STATUS. Aonyx capensis is not endan-
gered in South Africa (Rowe-Rowe 1978a), but it is rare throughout
most of its range because of its specialized niche. Throughout its
distribution, protected areas have been established and are be-


MAMMALIAN SPECIES
5
671—Aonyx capensis
lieved to sustain viable populations of A. capensis (Rowe-Rowe
1990b).
Cape clawless otters are threatened by direct killing for their
pelts or because they are seen as pests or as competitors for ﬁsh,
especially introduced rainbow trout (Butler 1994; Rowe-Rowe
1986). However, rainbow trout constitute only 1% of the diet of
Cape clawless otters (Butler 1994). In addition, crabs eaten by A.
capensis are much larger (median carapace size 20–25 mm versus
10–15 mm for trout) than those consumed by trout in similar hab-
itats (Butler and Marshall 1996). Thus, predation upon, or com-
petition with, rainbow trout for crabs is not a signiﬁcant factor af-
fecting trout populations (Butler and Marshall 1996).
The most important factor threatening Cape clawless otters is
increasing human populations and associated habitat changes (But-
ler 1994; Rowe-Rowe 1986, 1990b, 1995; Rowe-Rowe et al. 1995).
Changes to the water system due to agricultural practices may affect
Cape clawless otters indirectly by affecting the abundance of their
prey (Rowe-Rowe 1986). The major limiting factor for A. capensis
populations is the availability of clean, unpolluted water (Rowe-
Rowe 1985). In polluted waters, prey such as crabs, ﬁsh, and frogs
become so rare that Cape clawless otters cannot persist (Rowe-
Rowe 1985). In coastal areas, the availability of freshwater is crit-
ical to the subsistence of A. capensis populations (van Niekerk et
al. 1998).
GENETICS. Aonyx capensis has 2n 5 38 chromosomes (van
Zyll de Jong 1987).
REMARKS. Other vernacular names include African claw-
less otter, loutre a` joues blanches (French), Weisswangen-Otter
(German), groototter (Afrikaans), le Nyibi (Tswana), and umThini
(Zulu).
D. Dyck, M. Mierau, and C. Birchler helped with the map. M.
J. Somers kindly provided several excellent photographs. Skull pic-
tures were provided by S. Woodward of the Royal Ontario Museum,
Toronto. J. Craigie, K. Fuhrmann, H. Khanmoradi, C. Sillero-Zubiri,
D. T. Rowe-Rowe, and M. J. Somers provided several references
and reports. L. R. Walton, M. J. Somers, and D. T. Rowe-Rowe
reviewed earlier drafts of this manuscript.
LITERATURE CITED
ARDEN-CLARKE, C. H. G. 1986. Population density, home range
size and spatial organisation of the Cape clawless otter, Aonyx
capensis, in a marine habitat. Journal of Zoology, London 209:
201–211.
AVENANT, N. L. 1997. Mammals recorded in the QwaQwa National
Park (1994–1995). Koedoe 40:31–40.
BAKER, C. M. 1989. Feeding habits of the water mongoose (Atilax
paludinosus). Zeitschrift fu¨r Sa¨ugetierkunde 54:31–39.
BARANGA, J. 1995.
The distribution and conservation status of
otters in Uganda. Habitat 11:29–32.
BUTLER, J. R. A. 1994. Cape clawless otter conservation and a
trout river in Zimbabwe: a case study. Oryx 28:276–282.
BUTLER, J. R. A., AND J. T. DU TOIT. 1994. Diet and conservation
status of clawless otters in eastern Zimbabwe. South African
Journal of Wildlife Research 24:41–47.
BUTLER, J. R. A., AND B. E. MARSHALL. 1996. Resource use within
the crab-eating guild of the upper Kairezi River, Zimbabwe.
Journal of Tropical Ecology 12:475–490.
CARTER, Q. E. 1956. Ntini, the clawless otter. African Wild Life
10:300.
CHANIN, P. 1985. The natural history of otters. Facts on File Pub-
lications, New York.
CRAWFORD-CABRAL, J. 1989. Distributional data and notes on An-
golan carnivores (Mammalia: Carnivora). I—small and median
[sic]-sized species. Garcia de Orta, Se´ries de Zoologie, Lisboa
14(2):3–27
CUVIER, F. 1823. Loutre, Lutra. Dictionnaire des Sciences Natu-
relles, Paris 27:237–250.
DAVIS, J. A. 1978.
A classiﬁcation of the otters. Pp. 14–33 in
Otters (N. Duplaix, ed.). Proceedings of the ﬁrst working meet-
ing of the Otter Specialist Group. International Union for the
Conservation of Nature, Gland, Switzerland.
DONNELLY, B. G., AND J. H. GROBLER. 1976. Notes on food and
anvil using behaviour by the Cape clawless otter, Aonyx ci-
nerea, in the Rhodes Matopos National Park, Rhodesia. Ar-
noldia Rhodesia 7:1–8.
DORST, J., AND P. DANDELOT. 1970. A ﬁeld guide to the larger
mammals of Africa. Houghton Mifﬂin Company, Boston.
ELLERMAN, J. R., T. C. S. MORRISON-SCOTT, AND R. W. HAYMAN.
1953. Southern African mammals 1758 to 1951: a reclassi-
ﬁcation. British Museum of Natural History, London.
ESTES, R. D. 1991. The behavior guide to African mammals in-
cluding hoofed mammals, carnivores, primates. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
EYRE, M. 1963. A tame otter. African Wild Life 17:49–53.
FOSTER-TURLEY, P., S. MACDONALD, AND C. MASON. 1990. Otters:
an action plan for their conservation. International Union for
the Conservation of Nature, Otter Specialist Group Meeting,
Gland, Switzerland.
HARRIS, C. J. 1968. Otters: a study of the recent Lutrinae. Wein-
ﬁeld and Nicolson, London.
HINTON, M. A. C. 1921. Paraonyx—a new genus of clawless otter.
Annals and Magazine of Natural History 7:194–200.
HOPWOOD, A. T., AND J. P. HOLLYFIELD. 1954. An annotated bib-
liography of the fossil mammals of Africa (1742–1950). British
Museum of Natural History, Fossil Mammals of Africa 8:1–
194.
KINGDON, J. 1977. East African mammals: an atlas of evolution in
Africa. Academic Press, London 3A:1–476.
KINGDON, J. 1997. The Kingdon ﬁeld guide to African mammals.
Academic Press, San Diego, California.
KOEPFLI, K.-P., AND R. K. WAYNE. 1998. Phylogenetic relation-
ships of otters (Carnivora: Mustelidae) based on mitochondrial
cytochrome b sequences. Journal of Zoology, London 246:401–
416.
KRUUK, H., AND P. C. GOUDSWAARD. 1990. Effects of changes in
ﬁsh populations in Lake Victoria on the food of otters (Lutra
maculicollis Schinz and Aonyx capensis Lichtenstein). Afri-
can Journal of Ecology 28:322–329.
LEJEUNE, A., AND V. FRANK. 1990. Distribution of Lutra macu-
licollis in Rwanda: ecological constraints. International Union
for the Conservation of Nature, Otter Specialist Group Bulletin
5:8–16.
LESSON, R. P. 1827. Manuel de mammalogie. Roret, Paris 1:153–
157.
LIGTHART, M. F., J. A. J. NEL, AND N. L. AVENANT. 1994. Diet of
Cape clawless otters in part of the Breede River system. South
African Journal of Wildlife Research 24:38–39.
MAXWELL, G. 1960. Ring of bright water. Longmans Green, Lon-
don.
MAXWELL, G. 1963. The rocks remain. Dutton, New York.
MURRAY, A. 1860. Contributions to the fauna of Old Calabar—
mammals. Proceedings of the Royal Physical Society of Ed-
inburgh 2:157–158.
POHLE, H. 1919. Die Unterfamilie der Lutrinae. (Eine systema-
tisch-tiergeographische Studie an dem Material der Berliner
Museen). Archiv fu¨r Naturgeschichte 85A(9):1–247.
PRINGLE, J. A. 1977. The distribution of mammals in Natal. Part
2. Carnivora. Annals of the Natal Museum 23:93–115.
PURVES, M. G., H. KRUUK, AND J. A. J. NEL. 1994. Crabs Pota-
monautes perlatus in the diet of otter Aonyx capensis and
water mongoose Atilax paludinosus in a freshwater habitat in
South Africa. Zeitschrift fu¨r Sa¨ugetierkunde 59:332–341.
ROBERTS, A. 1951. The mammals of South Africa. Central News
Agency, Johannesburg.
ROUND, M. C. 1968. Check list of the helminth parasites of African
mammals of the orders Carnivora, Tubulidentata, Proboscidea,
Hyracoidea, Artiodactyla and Perissodactyla. Technical Com-
munication on the Commonwealth Bureau of Helminthology,
St. Albans 38:1–252.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1977a. Food ecology of otters in Natal, South
Africa. Oikos 28:210–219.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1977b. Prey capture and feeding behaviour of
South African otters. The Lammergeyer 23:13–21.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1977c. Variations in the predatory behaviour
of the clawless otter. The Lammergeyer 23:22–27.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1978a. Biology of the two otter species in South
Africa. Pp. 130–139 in Otters (N. Duplaix, ed.). Proceedings
of the ﬁrst working meeting of the Otter Specialist Group. In-
ternational Union for the Conservation of Nature, Gland, Swit-
zerland.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1978b.
The small carnivores of Natal. The
Lammergeyer 25:1–48.


6
MAMMALIAN SPECIES
671—Aonyx capensis
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1985.
Facts about otters. Wildlife Manage-
ment—Technical Guides for Farmers, Natal Parks Board, Pie-
termaritzburg 10:1–2.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1986. African otters—is their existence threat-
ened? International Union for the Conservation of Nature, Ot-
ter Specialist Group Bulletin 1:9–11.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1990a. Action plan for African otters. Pp. 41–
51 in Otters: an action plan for their conservation (P. Foster-
Turley, S. Macdonald, and C. Mason, eds.). Proceedings of the
International Union for the Conservation of Nature, Otter Spe-
cialist Group Meeting, Gland, Switzerland.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1990b.
Otter distribution and protection in
South Africa. International Union for the Conservation of Na-
ture, Otter Specialist Group Bulletin 5:17–23.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1992. Survey of South African otters in a fresh-
water habitat, using sign. South African Journal of Wildlife
Research 22:49–55.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T. 1995. Distribution and status of African otters.
Habitat 11:8–10.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T., C. CARUGATI, AND M. R. PERRIN. 1995. The
Natal Drakensberg Park as an otter sanctuary. Habitat 11:22–
24.
ROWE-ROWE, D. T., AND M. J. SOMERS. 1998. Diet, foraging be-
haviour and coexistence of African otters and the water mon-
goose. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 71:216–
227.
SAVAGE, R. J. G. 1957. The anatomy of Potamotherium, an Oli-
gocene lutrine. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of Lon-
don 129:151–244.
SAVAGE, R. J. G. 1978. Carnivora. Pp. 249–267 in Evolution of
African mammals (V. J. Maglio and H. B. S. Cooke, eds.).
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
SCHINZ, H. R. 1821. Das Tierreisch von dem Herrn. Ritter von
Cuvier, Stuttgart 1:211–214, 879.
SHEPPEY, K., AND R. T. F. BERNARD. 1984. Relative brain size in
the mammalian carnivores of the Cape Province of South Af-
rica. South African Journal of Zoology 19:305–308.
SHORTRIDGE, G. C. 1934. The mammals of south west Africa. Wil-
liam Heinemann Limited, London 1:1–437.
SKINNER, J., AND R. H. N. SMITHERS. 1990. The mammals of the
southern African subregion. University of Pretoria, South Af-
rica.
SMITH, L. 1993. Otters and gillnet ﬁshing in Lake Malawi National
Park. International Union for the Conservation of Nature, Otter
Specialist Group Bulletin 8:4–6.
SMITHERS, R. H. N. 1966. The mammals of Rhodesia, Zambia and
Malawi. Collins, London.
SMITHERS, R. H. N. 1971. The mammals of Botswana. Museum
Memoir, Trustees of the National Museum of Rhodesia, Sal-
isbury 4:1–340.
SMITHERS, R. H. N. 1983. The mammals of the southern African
subregion. University of Pretoria, South Africa.
SOMERS, M. J. 2000. Foraging behaviour of Cape clawless otters
Aonyx capensis in a marine habitat. Journal of Zoology, Lon-
don 252:473–480.
SOMERS, M. J., AND M. G. PURVES. 1996. Trophic overlap between
three syntopic semi-aquatic carnivores: Cape clawless otter,
spotted-necked otter and water mongoose. African Journal of
Ecology 34:158–166.
STUART, C. T. 1981. Notes on the mammalian carnivores of the
Cape Province, South Africa. Bontebok 1:1–58.
TAYLER, C. 1970. The elusive otter. The Eastern Cape Naturalist
39:20–23.
TEILHARD DE CHARDIN, P., AND P. LEROY. 1945. Les muste´lide´s
de Chine. Publications de l’Institut Ge´obiologique de Pe´kin
12:1–56.
TURNBULL-KEMP, P. ST. J. 1960a. Trout in southern Rhodesia. V.
Wildlife of the trout streams. The Rhodesia Agricultural Jour-
nal 57:134–140.
TURNBULL-KEMP, P. ST. J. 1960b. Quantitative estimations of pop-
ulations of the river crab, Potamon (Potamonautes) perlatus
(M. Edw.), in Rhodesian trout streams. Nature 185:481.
VAN DER ZEE, D. 1981. Prey of the Cape clawless otter (Aonyx
capensis) in the Tsitsikama Coastal National Park, South Af-
rica. Journal of Zoology, London 194:467–483.
VAN DER ZEE, D. 1982.
Density of Cape clawless otters Aonyx
capensis (Schinz, 1821) in the Tsitsikama Coastal National
Park. South African Journal of Wildlife Research 12:8–13.
VAN NIEKERK, C. H., M. J. SOMERS, AND J. A. J. NEL. 1998. Fresh-
water availability and distribution of Cape clawless otter
spraints and resting places along the south-west coast of South
Africa. South African Journal of Wildlife Research 28:68–72.
VAN ZYLL DE JONG, C. G. 1972. A systematic review of the Ne-
arctic and Neotropical river otters (genus Lutra, Mustelidae,
Carnivora). Life Sciences Contributions of the Royal Ontario
Museum 80:1–104.
VAN ZYLL DE JONG, C. G. 1987. A phylogenetic study of the Lu-
trinae (Carnivora; Mustelidae) using morphological data. Ca-
nadian Journal of Zoology 65:2536–2544.
VERWOERD, D. J. 1987. Observations on the food and status of the
Cape clawless otter Aonyx capensis at Betty’s Bay, South Af-
rica. South African Journal of Zoology 22:33–39.
WOZENCRAFT, W. C. 1993. Order Carnivora. Pp. 279–348 in Mam-
mal species of the world: a taxonomic and geographic refer-
ence (D. E. Wilson and D. M. Reeder, eds.). Smithsonian In-
stitution Press, Washington, D.C.
Editors of this account were ELAINE ANDERSON and VIRGINIA
HAYSSEN. Managing editor was VIRGINIA HAYSSEN.
S. LARIVIE` RE, DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF SASKATCH-
EWAN, 112 SCIENCE PLACE, SASKATOON, SASKATCHEWAN S7N 5E2,
CANADA, and INSTITUTE
FOR WETLAND
AND WATERFOWL RE-
SEARCH, DUCKS UNLIMITED INC., ONE WATERFOWL WAY, MEMPHIS,
TENNESSEE 38120-2351. Present address: DELTA WATERFOWL
FOUNDATION, R.R.#1, BOX 1, PORTAGE LA PRAIRIE, MANITOBA R1N
3A1, CANADA.
