--- 
source: 2007 000n-50.pdf
--- 

- 1 - 
A SHORT LITERATURE REVIEW ON THE TAXONOMY OF OTTERS  
 
 Andrew ROTHWELL 
 
Flat 2, 20, Solent Road, Drayton, Portsmouth, Hampshire. PO6 1HH, England.   
email:  ottermanandy@hotmail.com  
 
Key words:  Lutrinae, Mustelidae, otter, phylogeny, morphology, cytochrome b 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Otters belong to the sub-family Lutrinae from the family Mustelidae, which is one of the largest and 
diverse families of the order Carnivora (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986).  The Lutrinae comprise 
13 extant species which all have a series of semi-aquatic adaptations that distinguish its members 
from the rest of the Mustelidae.  Generally they have long thin sinuous bodies, short legs and a 
flattened head held close to the ground, with small ears and a broad muzzle surrounded by long stiff 
whiskers.  They have webbed feet and the tail is long and tapering.  Otters are expert swimmers, 
highly mobile in water whilst retaining considerable agility on land (CHANIN, 1985).   
 
The evolutionary history (phylogeny) of the otters has been under much examination from both 
early and present zoologists.  Consequently many changes have been be made in the interpretation 
of otter phylogeny and it continues to be under review.   
 
 
2.  PRE HISTORY 
 
Oligobunines (an early lineage of the Mustelids, possibly arising from bear-like creatures), gave rise 
to two distinct evolutionary groups: the heavy diggers and the burrow-hunters (MACDONALD, 1992).  
It is the latter which progressed into the modern weasels, martens and otters.   
 
The otters are the only Mustelids well represented in the fossil record (PALMER, 1999).  This is 
because as they live near water, they are more likely to become buried in the sediments and 
subsequently fossilised.  Potamotherium, which lived in the Loire Valley, is the oldest known otter 
and comes from the early Miocene (25 million years ago [mya]).  Like modern otters, its highly 
flexible backbone enabled it to manoeuvre easily underwater (PALMER, 1999).  Mionictis, found as 
fossils dating ca. 17 mya in North America, is considered to be the foremost ancestor of the recent 
otters (MACDONALD, 1992).   
 
 
3.  PHYLOGENY 
 
Past systematic studies have been based on morphological characters.  However, different methods 
have led to a number of revisions of the Lutrinae (KOEPFLI AND WAYNE, 1998).  The early 
taxonomy of otters was in great confusion, which was highlighted by the list produced which gave 
19 species and 63 sub-species (HARRIS, 1968).  This resulted from the enthusiasm of initial 
taxonomists for naming new sub-species (CHANIN, 1985).  A later review of the Lutrinae based on 
morphology together with behavioural traits, classified the otters into nine species placed in three 
tribes: Lutrini, Aonychini and Hydrictini (DAVIS, 1978). 
 
 


- 2 - 
 
 
 
Figure 1  Morphological analysis of the 13 species of otter based on Willemsen’s hypothesis (1992).  (redrawn from 
KOEPFLI AND WAYNE, 1998). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2  Phylogenetic relationships of nine species of otter based on maximum likelihood analysis of Cytochrome b 
sequence.  (Redrawn from KOEPFLI AND  WAYNE, 1998). 
 
 
Current classifications include phylogenetic relationships based on morphological characters of the 
13 species of otter (Figure 1) (KOEPFLI and WAYNE, 1998).  Moreover, recent studies from nine of 
the 13 species, through mitochondrial cytochrome b sequences, have rearranged the otters within 


- 3 - 
three primary clades (Figure 2).  Further suggestions indicate a rapid evolutionary radiation and that 
lineages leading to clades 1 and 3 diverged before the end of the Miocene, much earlier than that 
predicted from the fossil record (KOEPFLI AND WAYNE , 1998).   
 
Even today the classification of the Lutrinae is not fully resolved.  The relationship of the sea otter 
(Enhydra lutris) and giant otter (Pteronura brasiliensis) to the other Lutrinae is difficult to 
establish.  E. lutris is so morphologically different from its relatives that it has even been said to be 
akin to the true seals – the Phocidae (DE MUIZON, 1982).   
 
Phylogenetic analysis of the P. brasiliensis does not suggest a close relationship between the other 
New World river otters.  Furthermore, the P. brasiliensis has the highest percentage Cyt b sequence 
divergence from the other otters (KOEPFLI AND WAYNE, 1998).  There are even controversial 
suggestions that the P. brasiliensis is not a true otter.   
 
With further advances in genetic technology, the phylogeny of otters may yet change once again.   
 
 
4.  REFERENCES 
 
CHANIN, P. 1985. The  Natural History of Otters. Croom Helm, London. 
DAVIS, J.A. 1978. A Classification of Otters. In: Otters: Proceedings of the First Meeting of the Otter Specialist Group. 
(Edited by Duplaix, N.) Pp. 14-33. IUCN, Morges.   
DE MUIZON, C. 1982. Les relations phylogenetiques des Lutrinae (Mustelidae, Mammalia). Geobios, 6: 259 - 277.   
HARRIS, C.J. 1968. Otters: A Study of the Recent Lutrinae. Weiderfeld and Nicolson, London.   
KOEPFLI, K-P. & WAYNE, R.K. 1998. Phylogenetic Relationships of Otters (Carnivora: Mustelidae) Based on 
Mitochondrial Cytochrome b Sequences. Journal of Zoology, London, 246: 401 - 416.   
MACDONALD, D.1992. The Velvet Claw: A Natural History of the Carnivores. BBC Books, London.   
MASON, C.F. & MACDONALD, S.M. 1986. Otters: Ecology and Conservation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   
PALMER, D. [EDITOR] 1999. The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs & Prehistoric Animals. Marshall Publishing, 
London.   
