--- 
source: 2007 000n-59.pdf
--- 

OTTERS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES 
 
Jordi RUIZ-OLMO 
 
Departament de Medi Ambient i Habitatge, Generalitat de Catalunya, Dr. Roux 80, 08017 – Barcelona, Spain  
email: ajruiol@gencat.net  
 
 
Abstract:  The Eurasian otter is a semi aquatic Mustelid, distributed across the Mediterranean region. 
Countries, including those habitats (Portugal, Spain, France, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Albania, 
Greece, Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Syria, Jordan, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco and 
some small states or territories such as Andorra, Gibraltar, Monaco or San Marino), have experienced severe 
declines in otter numbers and distribution during the 20th century.  In this work we collect information on the 
distribution and threats for otters in these countries, we try to establish trends in these populations, and we 
include information about otters in the Mediterranean Sea and islands. 
 
Keywords: Eurasian otters, Lutra lutra, Mediterranean, status, conservation 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
The Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra L.) is a semi aquatic Mustelid, distributed across the 
Palaearctic region (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; FOSTER-TURLEY, MACDONALD AND 
MASON, 1990).  Throughout much of its range, the species experienced a dramatic decline 
during the second half of the 20th century. 
Its morphology and lifestyle are well adapted to its dependence of the aquatic 
environment (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; POLECHLA, 1991; DE SILVA, 1991; KRUUK, 
1995; RUIZ-OLMO, 1995; DUNSTONE, 1998).  Otters need water to maintain their water and 
energetic balance, to walk, move and swim in an energetically efficient way, to look for and 
to catch aquatic, amphibian and semi-aquatic prey.  In the southernmost part of its European 
range, however, as in some North African countries, L. lutra inhabits dry and semiarid 
regions, poor in water availability (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; JIMÉNEZ AND LACOMBA, 
1991; RUIZ-OLMO AND DELIBES, 1998; RUIZ-OLMO, 2001; RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002).  In such 
situations, otters must develop ecological and behavioural mechanisms to survive during 
periods of water and/or food shortages (RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002; PRENDA, LÓPEZ-NIEVES AND 
BRAVO, 2001).  In such habitats, there is supplementary ecological stress for the survival of 
the species. 
 
Countries, including those in the Mediterranean area, have also experienced severe 
declines in otter numbers and distribution (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; MACDONALD 
AND MASON, 1994).  In some cases, the trend seems to have reached its nadir, and otters are 
slowly recovering (RUIZ-OLMO AND DELIBES, 1998; TRINDADE, FARINHA AND FLORENCIO, 
1998). There are other areas, however, where very little is known about the current status of 
the species, or it is continuing to decline.   
 
The objectives of the present work were: 
  
1) 
To collect information on the distribution of otters in the countries around the  
       
Mediterranean Sea. 
2)    
To establish trends in these populations. 
3) 
To try and understand why the species inhabits some countries and islands of the     
            Mediterranean Sea but not others and to identify the factors affecting this. 


2   THE MEDITERRANEAN BIOCLIMATIC AREA 
 
The European, North African and Middle East Mediterranean area is well defined, with most 
of the lands experiencing a Mediterranean climate (BACCARIA, 1999; BLONDEL AND 
ARONSON, 1999).  Summers are warm (average temperatures over 20oC), and winters 
moderate (average temperatures above 0oC), with only exceptional snowy or frozen days.  
Rain is often maximum in spring and autumn, and minimal during summer and winter.  For 
this reason, rivers also have maximum flows in spring and autumn (often with catastrophic 
floods), and minimum in summer, with the streams and other water bodies often drying out, 
and water remaining only in pools (RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002).  In mountains and continental 
areas the weather is colder in winter, with snow and periods of prolonged frost and the rivers 
regime in these areas is nivo-pluvial. 
 
We can find the large Mediterranean ecosystem in a part or the whole of Portugal, 
Spain, France, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Albania, Greece, Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, 
Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Syria, Jordan, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco and some small 
states or territories such as Andorra, Gibraltar, Monaco or San Marino (Figure 1). There are 
25 countries in total, but otters are present only in more the continental ones, the species being 
absent from Libya, Malta, Cyprus, Monaco and San Marino (MASON and MACDONALD, 
1986). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  Trends in otter status and distribution in the Mediterranean countries 
 
 
Animal and plant communities are well adapted to water shortages, high summer 
temperatures, high evaporation and evapotranspiration, and large fluctuations in resources 
(MARGALEF, 1974; HILL, 1980; BLONDEL AND ARONSON, 1999).  The presence of mammals in 
these communities is largely influenced by man and his activities, with many species 
introduced between Europe and North Africa. L. lutra, however, is a species native to both 
sides of the Mediterranean Sea. 
Europe
Africa
24 countries
?
?
?
 
X
?
?
=
?
=
?
?
?
?
=
= 


3   TRENDS IN OTTER POPULATIONS IN MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES 
 
There are no general studies on the specific status of the otter in the Mediterranean area. They 
tend to be incorporated in wider European reviews (MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; 
MACDONALD AND MASON, 1994; CONROY AND CHANIN, 2002).  These studies, and those upon 
which they are based, proved the decline of the otter in most of these countries, being 
practically extinct during the 1980s within the Mediterranean area, from France, Italy, 
Algeria, Tunisia, Jordan and Israel, and becoming extinct in Andorra, Monaco and San 
Marino.  Large otter populations have only survived in Portugal, Spain, Albania, Greece, 
Turkey and Morocco.  
 
There are no studies or reviews, however, updating and summarising what the current 
status is, what is happening, what are the causes of changes in the otter populations, as well as 
identifying any new threats.  In an attempt to update the situation in the Mediterranean area, 
an analysis of published works up to 2003, was made. The following were examined: 
 
• 
Early studies: DJULIC AND MIRIC (1967), BLAS-ARITIO (1970, 1978), CAGNOLARA ET 
AL. (1975), FERRAN DE ALMEIDA (1987), SPAGNESI (1980), BOUCHARDY (1984), 
TURAN (1984)  
• 
National otter surveys: MACDONALD AND MASON (1982a & b: 1983a & b: 1984, 
1985), ELLIOT (1983), LILES AND JENKINS (1984), MACDONALD, MASON AND DE SMET 
(1985), MACDONALD, MASON AND SHALMON (1986), PRIGIONI, BOGLIANI AND 
BARBIERI (1986), GAETHLICH (1988), DELIBES (1990), SHALMON (1992), PAUNOVIĆ 
AND MILENKOVIĆ (1996), ROSOUX, TOURNEBIZE AND MAURIN (1996), RUIZ-OLMO 
AND DELIBES (1998), TRINDADE, FARINHA AND FLORENCIO. (1998), REUTHER ET AL.  
(2000a), DOLEV ET AL. (2005). 
• 
Other reviews: RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2002) 
• 
Local otter surveys: BROYER ET AL. (1984), TAYLOR ET AL. (1984), FERRAN DE 
ALMEIDA (1987), ILHAANI (1987, 1988), BEJA (1989), RUIZ-OLMO AND GOSÁLBEZ 
(1988), DELAKI ET AL. (1989), HÖNIGSFELD (1998), JIMÈNEZ AND LACOMBA (1991), 
GRÉMILLET (1993), ANDURAIN, BERTRAND AND MÉRARD (1995), FONDERFLIK ET AL. 
(1995), MICHELOT AND BENDELÉ (1995), EROGLU (1996), REGIANI ET AL. (1997), 
BUENO AND BRAVO (1998), CORTÉS ET AL. (1998), URBAN (1998), REUTHER AND 
DOLEV (2000), RUIZ-OLMO (2001), RUIZ-OLMO, SAAVEDRA AND JIMÉNEZ  (2001), 
PARDE (2003), JANSSENS ET AL (2005) 
• 
Other works: AUGLANIER (1985), LAPINI (1985), BOUCHARDY (1986), CASSOLA 
(1986), FOSTER-TURLEY, MACDONALD AND MASON (1990), LE BERRE (1990), EROGLU 
(1994), KOWALSKI AND RZEBIK-KOWALSKA (1991), KRANZ (1994), MACDONALD AND 
MASON (1994), TRINDADE (1994), FASANO AND MAGLIO (1995), GRÉMILLET (1995), 
JACOBY AND WILLIAMS (1995), OTTINO, PRIGIONI AND VIGNA TAGLIANTI  (1995), 
RUIZ-OLMO AND DELIBES (1996), WILLIAMS AND JACOBY (1995), PAUNOVIĆ AND 
MILENKOVIĆ (1996), SANTOS-REIS, TRINDADE AND BEJA (1996), PRIGNIONI (1997), 
REGIANI ET AL. (1997), CONROY, MELISCH AND CHANIN (1998), JACQUES (1998), 
KNOLLSEISEN (1998), SAAVEDRA AND SARGATAL (1998), URBAN (1998), REUTHER ET 
AL.  (2000a & b ), CLAVERO ET AL. (2002), RUIZ-OLMO (2002),  RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. 
(2004), SMET AND LYMERAKIS (2003), AMIT ET AL. (2005), BOUCHARDY, ROSOUX AND 
GREEN (2005), KALBY ET AL. (2005), THOL-SCHMITZ (2005). 


In addition, additional information was gathered from Michaela Bodner, Carlos Bravo, Félix 
Bueno, Amit Dolev, Xavier Grémillet, Jean Michel Parde, Milan Paunović, Rafael Romero, 
Renné Rosoux and Margarida Santos-Reis.  
 
 
All these data have permitted an update of the information on the current otter 
distribution and/or status within the Mediterranean countries towards 2001-2003 (Figure 1).  
While the species still seems to be present in all the countries, there is no new information 
about the general status from North Africa and the majority of the countries in the Middle 
East, in particular Lebanon, Palestine, Syria and most of Turkey: 
 
Iberian Peninsula (Spain, Portugal and Andorra). Otters are largely recovering in the Iberian 
Peninsula, and are well distributed throughout most of Portugal and Spain (RUIZ-OLMO AND 
DELIBES, 1998; TRINDADE, FARINHA AND FLORENCIO, 1998; RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2004), with 
the species returning even to formerly polluted areas, such as much of Catalonia, Madrid, 
Asturias or the Basque Country.  
 
In the Iberian Peninsula, the otter currently occupies almost half of all the freshwater 
areas in the west, from the sea level to the mountains (up to 2,400 m in summer time), and a 
significant part of the east.  Otters occupy practically every river or watercourse in Portugal, 
Galicia, Extremadura, Western Andalucia and Rioja, for example, and are recovering in many 
other areas.  The species can normally be found even in large cities such as Girona, Lleida, 
Logroño, Manresa, Teruel or Zaragoza.  Presently, L. lutra is even approaching the much 
larger cities such as Barcelona, Madrid or Seville, which could be recolonised during the next 
five to ten years. 
   
Even if the species is recovering, otters are still not returning to a large part of the 
Mediterranean facade, in, for example, Tarragona, Castellón, Valencia, Alacant or Murcia 
Provinces. The main limiting factor is the availability of, and demand for, water (RUIZ-OLMO 
ET AL, 2004) and human use of water resources is envisaged as the main danger for otters on 
the Iberian Peninsula in a foreseeable future. 
 
In Andorra the otter became extinct during the latter half of the 20th century. Two 
surveys carried out in 2000 and 2002 for the new Otter Action Plan (J. RUIZ-OLMO, 
unpublished data), provided only negative records.  The species has also returned to the 
neighbouring rivers of Catalonia, Spain (RUIZ-OLMO, 2001), one animal being found dead 
during 2003 (D. GUIXÉ, personal communication).  However, major habitat alteration, 
pollution and, very importantly, the lack of food in lower stretches make it difficult for the 
species to maintain a regular presence. Occasional dispersing otters may be detected in future. 
   
France and Monaco.  Although otters are recovering in some parts of France including the 
west and in the Massif Centrale (ROSOUX, TOURNEBIZE AND MAURIN, 1996; BOUCHARDY, 
ROSOUX AND GREEN, 2005), in the Mediterranean area, the process is much slower than in 
other parts of Europe (PARDE, 2003; JANSSENS ET AL., 2005; M. TESSIER, in litt.).  Otters are 
still absent from many areas of the middle Garonne basin in the vicinity of Toulouse (this 
despite being common in the upper river and its tributaries such as the Neste), a large part of 
the Pyrennees and the Roîne basin.   However, there is evidence of recolonisation in many 
areas, for example, the upper Cèze and other Mediterranean rivers in the area of Cevennes 
(JANSSENS ET AL., 2005) where the species is now found on the Mediterranean slope, and in 
the eastern Pyrenees, where otters which were re-introduced into Spain are now entering 
France and occupying rivers such as the Tech (Department of Pyrénnées-Orientales). Otters 
are still absent from Monaco. 
 
Italian Peninsula (Italy, San Marino).  Otters are still rare in Italy as they were during the 20th 
century (CAGNOLARA ET AL., 1975, SPAGNESI, 1980; MACDONALD AND MASON, 1983a).  


However, a recovery is happening in some areas.  In the south, in the Mediterranean region, 
the species has occupied new rivers in the Basilicata, Campania, Calabria and Puglia regions.  
The population is also recovering in some areas of northern Italy (REUTHER ET AL, 2000a; 
KALBY ET AL., 2005).  The central area (Toscana, Lazio) seems to be showing less of a 
recovery than elsewhere.  
 
The origin of the recolonisation could be mainly by animals from Slovenia (despite no 
signs being found along the Italian side of the border in the middle of the 1990s (A. GUTLEB, 
personal communication), and in expansion from the remaining populations in catchments of 
the Sele, Fiora and Crati in west central Italy, and Calore, in the south.  
 
Balkan Peninsula (Slovenia, Croatia, Montenegro, Albania, Greece). Otters were proved as a 
common species in Greece, Albania and former Yugoslavia (DJULIC AND MIRIC, 1967; 
MACDONALD AND MASON, 1982b; LILES AND JENKINS, 1984; TAYLOR ET AL., 1984; 
MACDONALD, MASON AND DE SMET, 1985; PRIGNIONI, BOGLIANI AND BARBIERI, 1986; 
GAETHLICH, 1988; DELAKI ET AL., 1989). However, no new publications on the species from 
this area could be found. Nevertheless, some information indicates that otters are still 
common in the region, as they were in the 1990s (PAUNOVIĆ AND MILENKOVIĆ, 1996).  In 
Slovenia, the species was suggested as having a rare status (HÖNIGSFELD, 1998).  
 
Anatolian Peninsula (Turkey.)  Little is know about the Anatolian otters (EROGLU, 1996; 
KRANZ, 1994; KNOLLSEISEN, 1996; CONROY, MELISCH AND CHANIN, 1998; THOL-SCHMITZ, 
2005).  Poaching apparently continues and there is significant habitat loss (mainly along the 
coast, because of pressures from tourism and human demographic increases).  Despite this, 
the species seem to be present in large areas of the country. 
 
Middle East (Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Palestina, Jordan).  Otters are still present in this very 
arid region. The more recent studies, carried out in Israel and West Jordan, showed L. lutra 
restricted to the Jordan catchment, with only occasional records in the west of Israel, near 
Haifa and on one small stream of the coastal plain (REUTHER ET AL. 2000b; DOLEV ET AL., 
2005).  The species is still found in the area of the Golan Heights to the Dead Sea. 
 
In Israel, otters use largely artificial habitats such as reservoirs and fishponds, because 
natural rivers have problems with subsistence.  Also, corridors connecting west Israel and the 
River Jordan catchments are being destroyed and changed, making it more and more difficult 
for otters to move from one part of the area to another. 
 
The species seems to be present in Syria, but are very rare (JACQUES, 1998) and, 
according to their distribution in Israel, they should also be present in Lebanon and the 
remainder of Jordan (see also, CONROY, MELISCH AND CHANIN, 1998). 
 
The main problem in this area is the demand for, and shortage of, water (including 
progressive desertification) and a process of isolation of otters into small basins.  The 
connection between Turkey and these more southerly neighbours is endangered. 
 
North Africa (Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia).  There are very few new data about the status 
of the otter in North Africa (MACDONALD AND MASON, 1983b, 1984; MASON AND 
MACDONALD, 1986; BROYER ET AL., 1984), and this is mostly from Morocco (JACOBY AND 
WILLIAMS, 1995; F. CASADESÚS, personal communication), where the species still lives in 
some areas.  Intensive agricultural, increasing water demand and pollution are the main 
threats.   
 
Little is known about the Algerian and Tunisian otter populations since the 1980s.  
Their present status is also unknown because they were very concentrated in small lowland 
areas. 


4.  CAUSES FOR THE CURRENT CHANGES IN OTTER DISTRIBUTION 
 
There are important differences between countries: 
 
• 
In some countries, the species is recovering or stable, coinciding mainly with those of 
the European Union and the northern part of the Mediterranean Sea: Portugal, Spain, 
France, Italy and almost certainly Greece. It is very probable that Slovenia, Croatia, 
Montenegro and Albania belong to this group. 
• 
In other countries, or at least parts of countries, there is evidence of a continuing 
decline, e.g., in Israel (stable at the Jordan catchment).   
• 
In countries, mostly in North Africa and the Middle East, there are few or no new data 
on the status or distribution of the species. These include Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, 
Jordan, Palestine, Syria, Lebanon and Turkey.    
• 
The otter is extinct in Andorra, Monaco and San Marino. 
 
The main causes attributed to the recovery of the otter are the legal and effective protection of 
the species, improvement in the management of its habitats and specially the decline in 
pollutant levels (RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002).  
 
The following are seen as the causes for the decline (or future possible decline, in 
southern and eastern Spain, southern Italy, Greece and Turkey): 
 
• 
Water demand for human activities (JIMÉNEZ AND LACOMBA, 1991; RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 
2002). Northern Mediterranean countries use 90 m3 of water per person per year 
compared with only 45 m3 in the southern area.  In 2025, the projection is for 110 and 
65 m3/year/person respectively, and the human population is forecast to more or less 
double twice (BACCARIA, 1999).  In 1998 Morocco and Tunisia were using more than 
50% of the water available to humans for agriculture.  The corresponding figure for 
Italy was 65%, while for Algeria and Spain it was 85-95%.    
• 
Continued habitat destruction (KRANZ, 1994). For example, in 1998, 43.5% of the 
46,000 kilometres of the Mediterranean coast was urbanised (BACCARIA, 1999). 
• 
Otter persecution and poaching (EROGLU, 1994; KRANZ, 1994; JACQUES, 1998; 
CONROY, MELISCH AND CHANIN, 1998) 
• 
Pollution: Existing pollution levels as well as newly developed substances (GUTLEB, 
2002; RUIZ-OLMO ET AL., 2002). 
 
 
5.  OTTERS ALONG THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA AND ITS ISLANDS 
 
There are healthy otter populations living in coastal habitats (Figure 2) of north eastern Spain 
(Galicia and Asturias) and Portugal (Minho), and in south western Spain (Andalucía) and 
Portugal (Algarve and Baixo Alenteijo) (BEJA, 1989; DELIBES, 1990; RUIZ-OLMO AND 
DELIBES, 1998; TRINDADE, FARINHA AND FLORENCIO, 1998; CLAVERO ET AL, 2002, in press).  
BEJA (1995, 1996) described how otters used the coast of Portugal from studies of four radio-
tracked females.  He found that the presence of abundant freshwater made a permanent 
presence possible (BEJA, 1996), as in parts of northern Europe (KRUUK, 1995). 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Coastal otter populations in the Atlantic sea and Mediterranean island otter populations. No data 
from the Atlantic coast of Moroccoand a part of Portugal. In Catalonia, Corfu, the otters reach the sea, but they 
are not coastal populations 
 
Differing from the Atlantic seaboard, where otters live permanently on the coast and offshore 
islands while feeding in the sea (even in Portugal and Spain), there are only a few such otter 
populations in the Mediterranean Sea. These are: 
 
• 
The part of the Mediterranean sea lying within the Atlantic biogeographic range, 
which extends more or less 50-70 kilometres into the Mediterranean (Figure 2). There, 
as in the Atlantic Ocean (BEJA, 1989, 1996), otters use very small and short coastal 
rivers and streams as well as the marine habitat (RUIZ-OLMO AND DELIBES, 1998; 
CLAVERO ET AL., 2002; in press). This is, however, one of the busiest tourist areas in 
Spain (Costa del Sol), which means that a large section of the coast has lost it ‘natural 
habitat’ making otters movements along the coast more difficult.  
• 
On the islands of Corfu and Euboea in Greece (and possibly some Turkish islands; 
KRANZ, 1994; KNOLLSEISEN, 1996), where there are also inland otter populations 
(GAETHLICH, 1998; GRÉMILLET, 1988, 1995; URBAN, 1998; J. RUIZ-OLMO, 
Unpublished data), reaching the sea. 
• 
Otters that live primarily in freshwater ecosystems but can travel to the sea during 
their movements.  RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2001b) and SAAVEDRA (2002) confirmed this by 
radio tracking several individuals.  
 
KRANZ (1994) and KNOLLSEISEN (1996) also found otters living near Akcarpinar on the south 
west coast of Turkey feeding largely on estuarine fish.  No evidence of sea foraging was 
found and more information should therefore be gathered.  
Occasionally otters are seen in the Mediterranean Sea (in Italy, R. FASANO, personal 
communication; KNOLLSEISEN, 1996) and in Israel (A. DOLEV, personal communication).  
However, RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2001b) and SAAVEDRA (2002) radio tracked otters along a 
Europe
Africa
Geographic 
boundary 
Biogeographic 
boundary 
?
X
X
?
X
X
 
X
?
?
?


number of rivers and streams reaching the Mediterranean Sea in Girona Province (north east 
Spain) and found tracks on the beaches.  No animals have been seen to use the coast for their 
dens, foraging or even moving any distance.  Also, RUIZ-OLMO AND ORO (1993) studied the 
presence of otter and monk seal (Monachus monachus) in the coastal habitats of Catalonia 
(north east Spain) before the otter re-introduction in 1995 by interviewing 288 professional 
fishermen.  Despite the seal being considered extinct since around 1950, 6.6% of fishermen 
said they had seen this species between 1900 and 1950.  In contrast, none reported having 
seen any otters between 1900 and 1985, when the last otter was detected in this area (before 
its re-introduction). 
 
So otters in the Mediterranean area make far less use of coastal habitats than in the 
Atlantic Ocean. Some causes and differences in the Mediterranean Sea could explain such 
differences: 
 
• 
Very small tidal area and no kelp forests. 
• 
Lower productivity and production in the majority of Mediterranean waters 
(phytoplankton estimates by satellite according to the US Global Ocean Flux Study 
Programme from NSF/NASA). 
• 
Higher water salinity (36.5 – 40 mg/l in the Mediterranean Sea compared with < 33 - 
36.5 mg/l in the Atlantic (MARGALEF, 1974). 
• 
Higher water and air temperatures (BACCARIA, 1999). 
• 
Less (No) freshwater pools and small streams along the coast, because of less 
precipitation and higher evaporation. Under such conditions, otters can only wash 
their fur, as was proposed for KRUUK (1995) and BEJA (1996), at river mouths, lakes, 
etc.  Thus otters are always dependent on the presence of rivers, streams or marshes. 
• 
The Mediterranean Sea was not (or less) covered by ice during glaciations, so otters 
were less able to colonise big/distant islands (with enough habitat to support viable 
populations).  For this reason, there are few continental fish species on these islands.  
Otters are lacking from the Balearic Islands, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily, Malta and 
Cyprus.  Lately, SMET AND LYMERAKIS (2003) reported otter spraints on the island of 
Crete. None had been detected in previous surveys carried out.  In 1990, we could not 
finnd evidence of the species at ten surveyed sites (J. RUIZ-OLMO, unpublished data).  
Considering the potential importance of such findings, they should be confirmed as 
soon as possible. 
 
Two special cases are Corfu and Euboea Islands, in Greece (GAETHLICH, 1988; GRÉMILLET, 
1988, 1995; URBAN, 1998; our findings).  The former has been more intensively surveyed, 
showing that there is still a small and endangered otter population (Figure 3).  The species 
was only detected in inland rivers and lakes, at the mouths of rivers, and was found to be 
more common in the north and east (no evidence of otters in the western part).  In summer 
2003, M. BODNER (personal communication) surveyed some areas on the island of Corfu. 
Otters were found on Korisia Lagoon, and Rivers Mesongi, Ropas and Potamos, confirming 
its presence. However, otters were undetected at Lefkimmi Saltworks, one of the Gavrolomni 
lakes and Andinioti Lagoon. 
 
Corfu is only two kilometres from the Albanian coast, so immigration is possible, as 
BLUNDELL ET AL. (2002) found similar movements for Lontra canadensis between Alaskan 
islands.  However humans could also have brought otters to Corfu, as has been suggested as 
probably being the case in Shetland, where the Vikings may have taken otters from 
Scandinavia, over 1,000 years ago (J.W.H. CONROY, personal communication).   
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  Distrubution of the Otter in Corfú island (Greece) 
 
Despite there being no “coastal otters” in the Mediterranean Sea, individuals must move along 
the shoreline and, perhaps, may have swum across the short sea distance from Albania.  These 
otters should be studied carefully and protected, because they are highly endangered 
(GRÉMILLET, 1995) and might be the only otters inhabiting islands within the Mediterranean 
Sea. 
 
In the Atlantic Ocean otters more or less regularly travel between islands, as is the 
case of the Islands of Cies and Ons in Galicia (north west Spain) (DELIBES, 1990; RUIZ-OLMO 
and DELIBES, 1998; R. ROMERO, Unpublished data). 
 
 
6   AN ESTIMATION OF OTTER NUMBERS 
 
If there are difficulties in determining the actual distribution of the otter in the Mediterranean 
area, it is even more difficult, even impossible, to establish the number of otters and the 
population sizes.  There are only local estimates on density for some stretches, mainly for 
Catalonia and Eastern Aragón in north east Spain (RUIZ-OLMO, 1995, 1998, 2001, 
 
 
1985-86 
M. Gaethlich, 1988  
 
 
1990 
J. Ruiz-Olmo, unpubl. 
 
 
1992 
 
X. Gémillet, 


Unpublished data; RUIZ-OLMO, LÓPEZ-MARTÍN AND PALAZÓN, 2001a), and on a river in 
central Spain (BRAVO, BUENO AND SÁNCHEZ-AGUADO, 1998).  Otter abundance is very 
closely related to of resource fluctuations for the same locality, habitats and altitude. Densities 
normally vary from 0.1 to 0.9 otters per kilometre, but in some cases exceed these values.  
According to these precedent references, in oligotrophic and high altitude rivers, numbers can 
vary between 0.1 and 0.2 otters per kilometre while along more productive rivers, densities 
can be as high as 0.2-0.9 otters per kilometre, or even more. 
 
 
7   OTTER DISTRIBUTION AND ALTITUDE 
 
Otters inhabiting areas above 1,500 and 2,000 metres (up to 2,400 metres in the Pyrenean 
mountains; RUIZ-OLMO AND GOSÁLBEZ, 1988) are rare in Europe (RUIZ-OLMO, 1998), and 
unknown in North Africa and the Middle East.  Such a situation is not common and is 
dependent on food availability and water body mass characteristics (RUIZ-OLMO, 1998; 
MORALES ET AL., 1998).  In Figure 4, the main areas within the Mediterranean region where 
otters live at altitude are shown, corresponding in Spain to the Spanish Pyrenean Mountains, 
the León Mountains (Sanabria Lake etc), the central Mountains (including Gredos and 
Guadarrama), the Iberic, Segura and probably, the Sierra Nevada Mountains.  In Portugal, the 
Sierra d’Estrela and, in Morocco, possibly parts of the Atlas Mountains. 
Conservation of such otter population, mainly those living over 2,000 metres is 
needed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Europe
Africa


 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  Altitude otter populations (over 1,800 – 2,000 m) in the Mediterranean area (in dark grey) in front of 
areas over 2000 m a.s.l. (clear grey). In the Atlas Mountains, the otter could reach higher altitudes 
 
 
 
8   CONCLUSIONS 
 
In general otters living in the Mediterranean region seem to be out of immediate danger. 
There are healthy and increasing populations in south western Europe (Portugal, Spain, Italy 
and large areas of France).  It is assumed  that this is also the situation in Slovenia, Croatia, 
Montenegro, Albania, Greece and Turkey, although, there have been no actual otter surveys 
from there for a number of years.  In most countries in the Middle East and North Africa there 
have been very few studies of otters.  Their situation in such a special large biogeographical 
area can best be summarised as: 
 
• 
There is evidence of the recovery or stability in otter distribution over most of the 
territory of the European Union 
• 
Actual information on the otter’s status in North Africa, Mediterranean habitats of 
western Asia, Croatia, Montenegro and Albania is lacking. 
• 
This is especially important if the presence of the L. l. splendida (= L.l angustifrons) 
and L. l. seistin are confirmed in future. So an effort should be made to investigate 
this.  
• 
As happened before in south west Europe, there are very isolated populations in North 
Africa, and probably in Israel, Jordan, Syria and Palestine, while information from 
Lebanon and Syria is lacking 
• 
Otter surveys for these areas/countries are needed urgently. 
• 
Otters do not inhabit the Mediterranean coasts (except where they reach the sea by 
moving downriver), but there are good populations along the Mediterranean coast 
immediately adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean (considered as a biogeographical 
approach) and small populations on two Greek islands (Corfu and Euboea) and 
possibly also on some Turkish islands.  The status on Crete should be checked as soon 
as possible. 
• 
There are no good and rigorous estimations of otter numbers or population sizes in this 
area, except for some relatively small regions.  Researches should be encouraged to 
develop standard methods to establish such values. 
• 
The overuse of water resources, important changes in rivers, lakes and coastal 
structures, and increasing human activities are considered the main threat factors in the 
countries of the Mediterranean region.  This is especially true in economically 
developing areas or in the driest regions. Conservation actions and planning must be 
developed in order to ensure otter conservation, as this is a bioindicator and flagship 
species. 
• 
There are ecological situations, in which otters are involved and which need special 
conservation actions because of their vulnerability:  natural protected spaces (in 
Europe Union within the Nature 2000 network) for Atlantic coastal areas and its small 
coastal streams otter populations, populations living at altitudes above 1,500 metres, 


Mediterranean isolated lake populations, Mediterranean islands populations or very 
isolated stream populations, among others. 
• 
Research on adaptation of otters to droughts, catastrophic floods, food shortages, 
pollution, tourism, among others, must be undertaken. 
 
9   REFERENCES 
 
AMIT, D., GUTER, A., SALTZ, D. & KRONFELD-SCHOR, N. 2005. Israel’s otter (Lutra lutra) population, status 
and future conservation. (In: The Return of the Otter in Europe – where and how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of 
Skye 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  
International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye.   
ANDURAIN, P D’, BERTRAND, A & MÉRARD, P. 1995. Statut de la loutre dans la Région Midi-Pyrénées. In: La 
loutre et le vison d'Europe. Acts XVII Internationale Mammalogie Colloquium, Niort 23-25 Octobre 1993 Edited 
by Gautier, J.Y., Libois, R. & Rosoux, R.) Cahiers d'Ethologie, 15: 239-244. 
AUGLANIER, S. 1985. Morocco. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 2: 4-5. 
BACCARIA, J. (CO-ORDINATOR). 1999. Environmental Atlas of the Mediterranean. The Structure of the 
Territory and the Landscape. Pòrtic, Ed. Barcelona. 
BEJA, P.R. 1989. Coastal otters in south west Portugal. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 4: 2-7. 
BEJA, P.R. 1995. Patterns of Availability and use of Resources by Otters (Lutra lutra L.) in south west Portugal. 
Ph.D. Thesis. University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen.  
BEJA, P.R. 1996. Temporal and spatial patterns of rest-site use by four female otters Lutra lutra along the south 
west coast of Portugal. Journal of Zoology, London. 239: 741-753. 
BLAS-ARITIO, L. 1970. Vida y Costumbres de los Mustélidos Españoles. Servicio de Pesca Continental, Caza y 
Parques Nacionales, Madrid.  
BLAS-ARITIO, L.  1978. Informe sobre la situación de la nutria en España. In: Otters: Proceedings of the First 
Working Meeting of the Otter Specialist Group (Edited by Duplaix, N.) Pp. 140-142. IUCN, Morges. 
BLONDEL, J. & ARONSON, J. 1999. Biology and Wildlife of the Mediterranean Region. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford. 
BLUNDELL,, G.M., BEN-DAVID, M., GROVES, P., BOWYER. R.T. & GEFFEN, E. 2002. Characteristics of sex-
biased dispersal and gene flow in coastal river otters: implications for natural recolonisation of extirpated 
populations. Molecular Ecology, 11: 289-303. 
BOUCHARDY, C. 1984. La Loutre Lutra lutra. In: Atlas des Mammifères Sauvages de France. Société Française 
pour l’Étude et la Protection des Mammifères, Paris. Pp. 118-119. 
BOUCHARDY, C.. 1986. La Loutre. Ed. Sang de la Terre, París. 
BOUCHARDY, C., ROSOUX, R & GREEN, R. 2005. The otter Lutra lutra in France. An update of the 
recolonisation of otters from the Massif Central and Atlantic coast populations. . (In: The Return of the Otter in 
Europe – where and how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., 
Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye.    
BROYER, J., AULAGNIER, S., DESTRE, R. & GASCHIRNAD, O. 1984. La loutre Lutra lutra splendida dans le sud 
du Maroc. Bulletin Groupe Loutres, 18: 12-20. 
BRAVO, C., BUENO, F. & SÁNCHEZ-AGUADO, F. 1998. Censo visual de nnutria (Lutra lutra) y visón Americano 
(Mustela vison) en el Parque Natural de las Hoces del Río Duratón (Segovia). Galemys, 10 (número special): 89-
96. 
BUENO, F. & BRAVO, C. 1998. Comentarios sobre la evolución de las poblaciones de nutria (Lutra lutra) en dos 
zonas del centro de España. Galemys, 10 (núm special): 151-161. 
CAGNOLARO, L., RUSO, D., SPAGNESI, M. & VENTURI, B. 1975. Inchiesta sulla distribuzzione della lontra 
(Lutra lutra) in Italia e nei Cantoni Ticino e Grigioni (Svizzera) 1971-1973. Laboratorio di  Zoologia  Applicata 
a la caccia. Biologia della Selvagina, 63: 1-120. 
CASSOLA,, F. 1986. La lontra in Italia. Censimento, Distribuzione e Problemi di Conservazione di una Specia 
Minacciata. Serie Atti e Studie. WWF, Roma. 
CLAVERO, M., PRENDA, J., BLANCO, P., REBOLLO, A.,VALLE, J., NARVÁEZ, M. BARRIOS, L. & DELIBES, M. 
2002. Tesoros naturales de los ríos del Campo de Gibraltar. Quercus, 193: 14-19. 
CLAVERO, M., PRENDA, J., NARVÁEZ, M., BARRIOS, L., VALLE, J., REBOLLO, A., BLANCO, P. & DELIBES, M. 
in press. Distribución y dieta de la nutria en ambientes áltamente heterogéneos del Campo de Gibraltar. 
Almoraima. 
CONROY, J.W.H. & CHANIN, P.R.F. 2002. The status of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) in Europe- A review. 
In: Proceedings of the First Otter Toxicology Conference, Skye, September 2000 (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., 


Yoxon, P. & Gutleb, A.C.) Journal of the International Otter Survival Fund, 1: 7-18.  International Otter 
Survival Fund, Broadford, Skye. 
CONROY, J. W.H., MELISCH & CHANIN, P.R.F. 1998. The distribution and status of the Eurasian otter (Lutra 
lutra) in Asia. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 15: 15- 30.  
CORTÉS, Y., FERNÁNDEZ-SALVADOR, R., GARCÍA, F.J., VIRGÓS, E. & LLORENTE, M. 1998. Changes in otter 
Lutra lutra distribution in Central Spain in the 1964-1995 period. Biological Conservation, 86: 179-183. 
DELAKI, E.-E., KOTZAGEORGIS, G.,  IONNIDOU, V. &  STAMOPOULOS, A. 1989. A study of otters in Lake 
Mikri Prespa, Greece. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 3: 12-16. 
DELIBES, M. 1990. La Nutria (Lutra lutra) en España. Serie Tècnica. ICONA,  
DOBSON, M. 1998. Mammal distribution in the western Mediterranean: the role of human intervention. Mammal 
Review, 28: 77-88. 
DE SILVA P.K. 1991. Aspects of behaviour and ecology of old world otters. A review. In: Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited by Reuther, C. & Röchert, R.) Habitat, 6: 95-
106. 
DJULIC, B. & MIROC, D.J. 1967. Catalogus Faunae Jugoslaviae. Mammalia (Ljubljana), 4: 1-46.  
DOLEV, A., GUTER, A., SALTZ, D. & KRONFELD-SCHNOR, N.  2005. Israel’s Otter (Lutra lutra) population, 
status and future conservation. . (In: The Return of the Otter in Europe – where and how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, 
Isle of Skye 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-
xx.  International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye.    
DUNSTONE, N. 1998. The Mink. Poyser Natural History, London. 
ELLIOT, K.M. 1983. The otter Lutra lutra in Spain. Mammal Review, 13: 25-34. 
EROGLU, M. 1994. The status and habitat destruction of the otter (Lutra lutra L.) in the eastern Black Sea region 
of Turkey. In: Seminar of the Conservation of the European otter (Lutra lutra), Leewarden, the Netherlands, 7-
11 June 1994. Council of Europe, pp. 81-83.  
FASANO, R. & MAGLIO, G. 1995. Presenza della contra (Lutra lutra) nei Monti Lattari (Campania). In: Biology 
and Conservation of Mustelids.  Proceedings of the II Italian Symposium on Carnivores, Pavia, 20-22 Octobre 
1993,  (Edited by Prignioni, C.).  Hystrix (n.s.), 7: 243-245. 
FERRAN DE ALMEIDA, F. 1987. A propòs de la distribution de la loutre au Portugal. Ciênc. Bioo. Ecol. Syst. 
(Portugal), 7: 11-15. 
FONDERFLIK, J., DE KERMABON, J., LIBOIS, R., BAFFIE, P., ROSOUX, R. & TOURNEBIZE, T. 1995. Evolution 
récente du statut de la loutre dnas le Parc Nacional de Cévennes. Cahier d’Ethologie, 15: 233-238. 
FOSTER-TURLEY, P., MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. (Editors) 1990. Otters. An Action Plan for their 
Conservation. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland. 
GAETHLICH, M. 1988. Otters in western Greece and Corfu. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin. 3: 17-23. 
GRÉMILLET, X, 1993. Field survey of Lutra lutra in Corfu island (Greece). IUCN Otter Specialist Group 
Bulletin, 8: 39-42. 
GRÉMILLET, X.. 1995. Proposals for the conservation of otters Lutra lutra on Corfu island (Ionian Sea, Greece). 
In: Biology and Conservation of Mustelids.  Proceedings of the II Italian Symposium on Carnivores, Pavia, 20-
22 Octobre 1993,  (Edited by Prignioni, C.) Hystrix (n.s.), 7: 219-222. 
GUTLEB, A.C. 2002. The role of pollutants in the decline of the otter. . In: The Proceedings of the First Otter 
Toxicology Conference, Skye, September 2000 (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, P. & Gutleb, A.C.) Journal of 
the International Otter Survival Fund, 1: 29-40. International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Skye 
HILL, R.W. 1980. Comparative Physiology of Animals and Environmental Approach. Harper & Row, 
Publishing, New York.  
HÖNIGSFELD, M. 1998. New threats to continuous viable otter populations in the north eastern part of Slovenia. 
Poster presented at  the Seventh  International Otter Colloquium, Trebon, Czech Republic, 14-19 March 1998. 
ILHAANI, G. 1987. The last otters on the coastal plain. Israel Land Naturalist, 14: 245. 
ILHAANI, G. 1988. Otters still alive on the Golan Heights. Israel Land Naturalist, 14: 245. 
JACOBY, M.C. & WILLIAMS, J.L.R. 1995. Recent otter records from central Morocco. IUCN Otter Specialist 
Group Bulletin, 12: 11-12. 
JACQUES, H. 1998. Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) still present in Syria. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 15: 
112-113. 
JANSSENS, X., DE KERMABON, J., BARET, P. & DEFOURNY, P. 2005. Space-time analysis of the recolonisation 
of hydrographical networks by the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra L.) in the Cevennes. (In: The Return of the Otter in 
Europe – where and how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., 
Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx. International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye.    
JIMÉNEZ,  J. & LACOMBA, I. 1991. The influence of water demands on otter (Lutra lutra) distribution in 
Mediterranean Spain. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited 
by Reuther, C. & Röchert, R.) Habitat: 249-255. 


KALBY, M., CANNETIELLO, M., DI BELLO, S., VORRASI, A. & MILONE, M. 2005. A historical analysis of otter 
distribution (Lutra lutra) in the fluvial basins of the Campania and Basilicata Regions (southern Italy). In: The 
Return of the Otter in Europe - where and how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited 
by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  International Otter Survival Fund, 
Broadford, Isle of Skye.   
KNOLLSEISEN, M. 1998. Some aspects of the feeding ecology of otters (Lutra lutra) in Turkey. IUCN Otter 
Specialist Group Bulletin, 13: 20-26. 
KOWALSKI,, K. & RZEBIK-KOWALSKA, B.1991. Mammals of Algeria. Polish Academy of Sciences, Wroclaw, 
Warszawa and Kraków. 
KRANZ, A. 1994. Some comments on the otter (Lutra lutra) in Turkey.  IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 
10: 30-31. 
KRUUK, H. 1995. Wild Otters. Predation and Populations. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
LAPINI, L. 1985. La Lontra. Carlo Lorentini Editore, Udine. 
LE BERRE, M. 1990. Faune du Sahara. 2. Mammifères. Raymond Chavaud Lechevalier, Paris. 
LILES, G. & JENKINS, L. 1984. A field survey for otters (Lutra lutra) in Yugoslavia. Journal of Zoology. 
London, 203: 282-284. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1982a. The otter Lutra lutra in central Portugal. Biological Conservation. 
22: 207-215. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1982b. Otters in Greece. Oryx, 16: 240-244. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1983a. The otter Lutra lutra in southern Italy. Biological Conservation., 
25: 95-101. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1983b. The otter (Lutra lutra) in Tunisia. Mammal Review, 13: 35-37. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1984. Otters in Morocco. Oryx, 18: 157-159. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1985. Otters, their habitat and conservation in north east Greece. Biological 
Conservation, 32: 191-210. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1994. Status and Conservation needs of the Otter (Lutra lutra) in the 
Western Palearctic. Council of Europe. Strasbourg. 
MACDONALD, S.M., MASON, C.F. & DE SMET, K. 1985. The otter (Lutra lutra) in north-central Algeria. 
Mammalia, 49: 215-219. 
MACDONALD, S.M., MASON, C.F. & SHALMON, B. 1986. A survey for otters in Israel. Oryx, 20: 233-236. 
MASON, C.F. & MACDONALD, S.M. 1986. Otters. Ecology and Conservation. Cambridge University, Press, 
Cambridge. 
MARGALEF, R. 1974. Ecología. Omega Ed., Barcelona. 
MICHELOT, J.-L. & BENDELÉ, R. 1995. Statut de la loutre dans le basin du Rhône et le département de 
l’Ardèche. In: La loutre et le vison d'Europe. Acts XVII Internationale Mammalogie Colloquium, Niort 23-25 
Octobre 1993. (Edited by Gautier, J.Y., Libois, R. & Rosoux, R.) Cahiers d'Ethologie, 15:  223-232. 
MORALES, J.J., RUIZ-OLMO, J., LIZANA, M. & GUTIÉRREZ, J. 1998. Diferencias en la ocupación por la nutria 
Paleártica (Lutra lutra) de lagunas y embalses de altitud en el centro y norte de la Península Ibérica. Galemys, 10 
(número special): 253-264. 
OTTINO, P., PRIGIONI, C., & VIGNA TAGLIIANTI, A. 1995. Idoneità ambientale per la contra (Lutra lutra) di 
alcuni fiumi dell’Abruzzo. In: Biology and Conservation of Mustelids.  Proceedings of the II Italian Symposium 
on Carnivores, Pavia, 20-22 Octobre 1993, (Edited by Prignioni, C.). Hystrix (n.s.) 7: 265-268. 
PARDE, J.M. 2003. Étude de la Loutre, Lutra lutra L., dans le Bassin Hydrographyque Garonne-Amont en 2002-
Début 2003. Rapport for the Ministère de l’Ecologie et du Développement Durable, Direction Régionale de 
l’Environnement de Midi-Pyrénnées, Fos. 
PAUNOVIĆ, M. & MILENKOVIĆ, M. 1996. The current status and distribution of the otter Lutra lutra L., 1758 in 
Serbia and Montenegro. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 13: 71-76. 
POLECHLA, P.J. 1991. A Preliminary Review of the Anatomy and Physiology of the Otters (Carnivora; 
Mustelidae; Lutrinae). In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited 
by Reuther, C. & Röchert, R.) Habitat, 6: 85-94. 
PRENDA , J., LÓPEZ-NIEVES, P. & BRAVO, R. 2001. Conservation of the otter Lutra lutra in a Mediterranean 
area: the importance of habitat quality and temporal variation in water availability. Aquatic Conservation: 
Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 11: 343-355. 
PRIGIONI, C. 1997. La lontra, una Vita Silenziosa Negli Ambienti Acquatici. Edagricole, Bologna. 
PRIOIONI, C., BOGLIANI, G. & BARBIERI, F. 1986. The otter Lutra lutra in Albania. Biological Conservation, 
36: 375-383.  
REGIANI, G., CIUCCI,, P., BOITANI, L. & ROCCA, F. 1997. Un approccio multicriteri alla conservazione della 
Lontra (Lutra lutra) in Italia. Supplementi della Ri ccercia sulla Biologia Selvaggina XX-VII: 751-758.   
RUETHER, C. & DOLEV, A. 2000. New findings of otters (Lutra lutra) in Israel. IUCN Otter Specialist Group 
Bulletin, 13): 80-82. 


REUTHER C., DOLCH, D., GREEN, R., JAHRL, J., JEFFERIES, D.J., KREKEMEYER, A., KUCEROVA, M., 
MADSEN, A.B.,  ROMANOWSKI, J., ROCHE, K., RUIZ-OLMO, J. TRINDADE, A. 2002a. Surveying and 
monitoring distribution and population trends of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra). Guidelines and evaluation of 
the standard method surveys as recommended by the European Section of the IUCN/SSC Otter Specialist Group. 
Habitat, 12: 1-148. 
REUTHER, C., RIFAI, L., QARCAS, M., ABU BAKER, M. & AMR, Z.S. 2000b. Results of an initial field survey 
for otters (Lutra lutra) in Jordan. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 17: 75-79. 
ROSOUX, R., TOURNEBIZE,, T. & MAURIN, H. 1996. Etude de la répartition de la loutre d'Europe (Lutra lutra) 
en France. Actualisation 1993. In: La loutre et le vison d'Europe. Acts XVII Internationale Mammalogie 
Colloquium, Niort 23-25 Octobre 1993. (Edited by Gautier, J.Y., Libois, R. & Rosoux, R.) Cahiers d'Ethologie, 
15: 195-206. :  
RUIZ-OLMO, J. 1995. Estudio Bionómico de la  Nutria (Lutra lutra L., 1758) en el N.E. de la Península Ibérica. 
Ph. D. Thesis, University of Barcelona, Barcelona. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J.  1998. Influence of altitude on the distribution, abundance and ecology of the otter (Lutra lutra). 
In Behaviour and Ecology of Riparian Mammals. (Edited by Dunstone, N. and Gorman, M.). Symposia of the 
Zoological Society of London, 71:159-176. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J.  2001. Pla de Conservació de la Llúdriga a Catalunya: Biologia Iconservació.  Generalitat de 
Catalunya, Departament de Medi Ambient, Documents dels Quaderns del Medi Ambient 6: 1-87. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J. & DELIBES, M. 1996. Recherches sur la loutre (Lutra lutra) et son status en Espagne. In: La 
loutre et le vison d'Europe. Acts XVII Internationale Mammalogie Colloquium, Niort 23-25Octobre 1993 (Edited 
by Gautier, J.Y., Libois, R. & Rosoux, R.) Cahiers d'Ethologie, 15: 169-180.  
RUIZ-OLMO, J. & DELIBES, M. 1998. La Nutria en España ante el Horizonte Delaño 2000. SECEM, Málaga.   
RUIZ-OLMO, J. & GOSÁLBEZ, J. 1988. Distribution of the otter, (Lutra lutra L. 1758) in the NE of the Iberian 
Peninsula. Publicacions del Departament de Zoologia de Barcelona, 14: 121-132.  
RUIZ-OLMO, J. & ORO, D. 1993. La nutria en las zonas húmedas litorales de Cataluña (N.E. de la Península 
Ibérica). Butlletí del Parc Natural del Delta de l’Ebre, 8: 36-41. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., LAFONTAINE, L., PRIGIONI, C., LÓPEZ-MARTÍN, J.M. & SANTOS-REIS, M. 2002. Pollution 
and its effects on Otter populations in south western Europe. In: The Proceedings of the First Otter Toxicology 
Conference, Skye, September 2000 (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, P. & Gutleb, A.C.) Journal of the 
International Otter Survival Fund, 1: 63-82. International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Skye 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., LÓPEZ-MARTÍN, J.M. & PALAZÓN, S. 2001. The influence of fish abundance on the otter 
(Lutra lutra) populations in Iberian Mediterranean habitats. Journal of Zoology. London,  254: 325-336. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., SAAVEDRA, D. & JIMÉNEZ,  J.  2001. Testing the otter surveys and visual and track censuses in 
the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra). Journal of Zoology. London, 235: 359-369. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., JIMÉNEZ,  J., PALAZÓN. & LÓPEZ-MARTÍN, J.M. 2002. Ecologie et conservation de la loutre 
(Lutra lutra) et du vison d’Europe (Mustela lutreola) aux milieux Mediterranèes. In L’Etude et la Conservation 
des Carnivores. (Edited by Chapron, G. and Moutou, F.) Pp. 104-112.  Société Française pour l’Étude et la 
Protection des Mammifères: Paris 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., JIMÉNEZ,  J., PALAZÓN, S. & BATET, A. 2004. La nutria intenta reconquistar las cuencas 
mediterráneas. Quercus, 216: 24-31. 
SAAVEDRA, D. 2002. Re-introduction of the Eurasian Otter (Lutra lutra) in Muga and Fluvià Basins (north east 
Spain): Viability, development, monitoring and trends of the new population. Ph. D. Thesis. University of 
Girona, Girona, Spain. 
SAAVEDRA, D. & SARGATAL, J. 1998. Re-introduction of the Otter (Lutra lutra) in north east Spain (Girona, 
province). Galemys, 10 (número special): 191-200.89-96. 
SANTOS-REIS, M., TRINDADE,, A. & BEJA, P.R. 1995. Situation et état des recherches sur la loutre au Portugal. 
In: La loutre et le vison d'Europe. Acts XVII Internationale Mammalogie Colloquium, Niort 23-25 Octobre 1993. 
(Edited by Gautier, J.Y., Libois, R. & Rosoux, R.) Cahiers d'Ethologie, 15:  1-14. 
SHALMON, B. 1992. Status of the otter in Israel. IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 7: 42. 
SMET, K. DE & LYMERAKIS, P. 2003. Eurasian Otters (Lutra lutra) in Crete? IUCN Otter Specialist Group 
Bulletin, 20: 72. 
SPAGNESI, M. 1980. Das Vorkommen des Fischotters in Italien. In: Der Fischotter in Europa: Verbreitung, 
Bedrohung, Erhaltung (Edited by Reuther, C & Festetics, A.) Pp. 211-214.  Selbstverlag, Oderhaus, Göttingen. 
TAYLOR, I.R., JEFFERIES, M.J., ABBOT, S.G., HUABERT, I.A.R. & VIRDEE, S.R.K. 1984. Distribution, habitat 
and diet of the otter Lutra lutra in the Drina catchment, Yugoslavia. Biological Conservation, 45: 109-119. 
THOL-SCHMITZ, H.  2005. Notes on the status on otter population:  Conservation, research and projects in 
Turkey. In: The Return of the Otter in Europe – where and how? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye 30 June – 5 
July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo, J.) xx-xx.  International Otter 
Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye.    


TRINDADE, A. 1994. Monitoring Lutra lutra Habitats in Portugal: a Conceptual Plan. IUCN Otter Specialist 
Group Bulletin, 10: 41-46. 
TRINDADE, A., FARINHA, N.  & FLORENCIO, E. 1998. A Distribuiçao da Lontra (Lutra lutra) em Portugal. 
Situaçao em 1995. Instituto da Conservaçao da Natureza. Ministério do Ambiente, Lisboa. 
TURAN, N. 1984. The hunting of wild animals of Turkey: mammals. Ongun Kardesler Matbaacilik Sanayii, 
Ankara. Pp. 100-101. 
URBAN, P. 1998. Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra L.) in the north western Greece – contribution to distribution, 
limiting factors and conservation measures. Vydra, 8: 44-47. 
WILLIAMS, J.L.R. & JACOBY, M.C. 1995. Otters in south west Andalucia, Spain – August 1995. IUCN Otter 
Specialist Group Bulletin, 12: 13-14. 
. 
 
 
 
