--- 
source: 2007 000n-58.pdf
--- 

RADIO-TRACKING AS A TOOL IN OTTER CONSERVATION 
 
Thomas SJÖÅSEN 
Falla Gård, Ryd 36, S-560 28 Lekeryd, Sweden 
email: maude-g@algonet.se  and  falla@familjen.se  
 
 
Abstract:  Between 1989 and 1994, re-introduced otters were radio-tracked in Sweden. The principal aim was to 
study their survival, movements and establishment pattern, in order to evaluate re-introduction as a possible 
method to reinforce an otter population. Captive-bred and wild-caught otters, both groups originally from the 
Norwegian coast, were part of the project. At the time of release the age of all the animals was approximately 
one year old. 
One year after re-introduction, the survival of the wild-caught otters was 79% and of captive-bred 42%.      
Among captive-bred otters there were individuals which had a relatively short period (< 7 weeks) between the 
mother-pup separation and the re-introduction. The survival of these animals was 80% while that of those 
animals with a relatively long separation period (7-14 weeks) was only 13%. 
The establishment of released otters occurred on average ten weeks after the release. Animals released 
in areas unoccupied by other otters became established in that area and gradually expanded outwards, while 
those released in already occupied areas moved away to an area without other otters at least of the same sex. 
Ten weeks after re-introduction, the mean distance between the release site and the centre of the home area was 
4.2 kilometres for otters released in unoccupied areas and 11.5 kilometres for those released in occupied areas. 
Established females had home areas of 19-35 kilometres], estimated as the length of lake banks 
together with the length of rivers and ditches. Compared to females, males had larger home areas (23-62 km) 
and these increased in size when the males became sexually mature. Females seemed to have feeding and 
breeding home areas while those of males seem to be important for finding mates. 
Radio telemetry is an excellent tool to track individuals to study different aspects of their biology such 
as survival, movements, activity etc. However, radio-tracking is often very time and personnel consuming. 
 
 
1.   INTRODUCTION 
 
Otter conservation covers a variety of branches, including field work, such as otter surveys, 
the work of nature and environmental agencies where important decisions are taken, etc. 
Several different methods and tools are needed to make a cocktail that can be used for  
conservation work. During the last ten years, for example, genetic research has developed to 
become an interesting and important tool for the understanding of population genetics. Since 
the end of the 1970s, radio telemetry is another useful tool to study both basic biological 
issues as well as applied subjects.  
The development of equipment used in radio telemetry has taken huge steps forward 
since the first telemetry work on otters in USA (MELQUIST AND HORNOCKER, 1979a  b, 1983) 
and the work with Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) in Sweden at the end of the 1980s and the 
early 1990s (SJÖÅSEN, 1996, 1997). Today there are radio transmitters that are supported with 
information from satellites by the GPS-system, transmitters from which data can be down-
loaded at, for example, weekly intervals.  Nevertheless, it is still relevant, irrespectively of the 
type of equipment, to discuss and give examples as to how the use of radio-tracking can be a 
tool to achieve information important in otter conservation. The aim of radio-tracking is first 
of all to determine the position of animals carrying the transmitters. This can give  interesting 
and more detailed information about animal survival, movements, home range size, habitat 
utilisation, activity pattern, inter- and intraspecific interaction etc. 
This paper focuses on results from radio-tracking in Sweden between 1989 and 1994. 
The aim of the project was to study the success of otter re-introduction by the use of radio-
tracking. When the Swedish Otter Project started in the 1980s, the status and development of 
the population in Sweden was uncertain because of the population decline that began at least 
30 years earlier. Re-introducing otters was seen as a means of preventing the extinction of the 


species in southern Sweden. Several otter surveys carried out during the 1980s identified 
where otters still existed and studied the distribution of possible populations. In connection 
with this, PCB-analysis of fish from several areas was done as well as other studies. 
 
 
2.   MATERIALS, METHODS AND RESULTS 
 
2.1   Re-introduction areas and otters 
 
Between 1987 and 1992 two areas were chosen for otter re-introduction, the first was ca. 100 
kilometres south west of Stockholm in the county of Södermanland, the second, ca. 60 
kilometres north of Stockholm, in the county of Uppland. Between 1987 and 1988, 18 otters 
(11 in Södermanland: 7 in Uppland) were released (none of these were fitted with radio 
transmitters. The fate of four animals is known – all died because of human influence. 
From 1989, all re-introduced otters were released in the county of Södermanland. 
During a four-year period, between 1989 and 1992, 36 juvenile otters were released, 11 were 
wild-caught and 25 captive-bred. All were fitted with implanted radio transmitters. The 
method of radio implantation was the same as that used by MELQUIST AND HORNOCKER (1979 
a, b). Otters, approximately one-year old, were chosen because at this age, they are in a 
‘natural dispersal’ phase. All the captive otters were born to two breeding females, 12 cubs by 
the first female, 13 by the second.  All, except one, were released in spring, after the ice had 
broken up on the lakes and during the spawning season for the majority of fish species, i.e. the 
season when the availability of food for otters is probably best. The wild-caught animals came 
from the Norwegian coast, translocated to Sweden where they were held in pens until spring-
time. All animals were released in lakes without any arrangement for special facilities like 
open pens with food.  
 
2.2    Fate and survival 
 
Of the 36 animals, 14 were still alive one year after release, radio contact with eight was lost, 
three drowned in fishing gear, the remaining 11 died of other causes – some probably from 
stress-related problems (SJÖÅSEN, 1996; Table 1). 
 
Table 1:  Fate in re-introduced otters (Lutra lutra) in the first year after release.  ( ) = animals dead after the 
first year. 
 
ORIGIN 
 
WILD-CAUGHT 
OTTERS 
CAPTIVE-BRED 
 OTTERS 
TOTAL 
Sex 
males 
females 
males 
females 
males + females 
Re-introduced in 1987-1988 
without radio transmitters 
3 
5 
2 
1 
11 
Fate unknown 
1 
5 
1 
1 
8 
Dead - fishing gear 
- 
- 
1 
- 
1 
Dead – traffic 
(1) 
- 
- 
- 
(1) 
Dead – shot 
1 
- 
- 
- 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Re-introduced in 1989-1992 with 
radio transmitters 
7 
4 
10 
15 
36 
Lost in radio contact 
1 
- 
1 
6 
7 
Alive 
3 
4 
2 
4 
13 
Dead – traffic 
(2) 
 
 
 
(2) 
Dead - fishing gear 
- 
- 
3 
- 
3 
Dead - cause unknown 
2 
- 
4 
5 
11 


 
The survival rate was calculated using the Kaplan-Meier estimation (KREBS, 1989; 
POLLOCK, WINTERSTEIN AND CONROY, 1989; POLLOCK ET AL., 1989). Captive-bred otters 
had a significantly lower mean survival rate (0.42%) compared to wild-caught otters (0.79%) 
(SJÖÅSEN, 1996). The offspring from the breeding females were removed from their mother 
and kept in other enclosures for a period before release into the study area. This separation-
release period varied from five to 98 days. Captive-bred otters with a separation-release 
period shorter than seven weeks had a significantly higher survival rate (0.80%) than otters 
with a long separation-release period (0.13%), but there was no difference between the groups 
of offspring from the two females. Thus, the survival rate was the same among captive-bred 
otters with short separation-release periods compared to wild-caught otters. 
 
2.3   Movements and establishments 
 
To test the method of release, a deliberate decision was taken to release the animals in two 
different situations. Some were released in areas where there were no other otters, others in 
areas where otters were already present. Those released in areas unoccupied by other otters 
often became established in that area at the mean distance of 4.2 kilometres from the release 
site to the centre of the home area (SJÖÅSEN, 1997). Otters released in areas already occupied 
by other otters moved out from the release area and became established, on average 11.5 
kilometres, from the release site. Experiments continued with some of the subsequent releases 
being in areas now occupied by earlier released animals. These newly released animals 
responded as expected by moving out from the occupied area to find an area free from otters – 
or at least free from otters of the same sex.  
In other words, after release the otters had a phase of movement before the phase of 
establishment. The former phase, especially among otters released in occupied areas, lasted 
about ten weeks. The maximum linear distance of movement from the release site was 39 
kilometres in an established female and 75 kilometres in a male found drowned in a fyke net 
more than two years (750 days) after  release. 
 
2.3   Home ranges 
 
The size of home areas, the home ranges, was measured on maps (1:50,000) as the bank 
length of lakes and the actual length of water courses, i.e. river and ditches. The size of home 
ranges was also estimated as minimum convex polygons. The calculation of the convex 
polygon can be done by using available computer software while the measurement of bank 
length continues to be done manually on maps. Otters spent most of their time along bank 
lines, at least in freshwater systems. The bank length is therefore a better biological factor, 
compared to a convex polygon, to measure the home range. However, sometimes the convex 
polygon can be useful to compare the size of otter home ranges with home range size of other 
species for example in correlation to the body weight, etc (SANDELL, 1989).  
The home range size estimated as bank length was between 19-35 kilometres in 
females and 23-62 kilometres in males, or estimated as minimum convex polygon between 7-
42 km2 in females and 10-175 km2 in males.  
There were no differences in home range size between the sexes until May of the 
second year. At that time, males increased their areas to more or less twice that of female 
home ranges. The conclusion is that females have breeding and feeding home ranges, while 
those of males seem to be more important for finding mates. In other words, females seem to 
be more careful and fastidious in their choice of home areas.   
 


2.4   Intra-sexual interactions of females 
 
In 1993, six females had established exclusive home ranges without any overlap. The length 
of the areas was 15-30 kilometres and most had a stable core area with some fluctuations 
depending on the season. The intra-sexual relations with rather sharp borders between the 
females probably illustrate the normal situation in the study area. 
There were, however, two areas with a degree of overlap. In these, the borders 
between them were fluctuating back and forth. Almost at the same time when one female 
withdrew, the other advanced so the home ranges were separated in time.  
 
2.5   Habitat use 
 
In all the six female home ranges there were habitats suitable for all seasons with water 
courses free from ice during the winter and lakes with good fish production during the 
summer. One female showed a seasonal migration between two different areas adjacent to 
each other. During the summer she used the lake, but when the ice covered the lake, she 
moved downstream to the river and estuary close to the sea. Similar behaviour was observed 
among other females, but not as evident as the one mentioned. Some females decreased their 
home range sizes and their activities were concentrated to areas with open water during the 
winter. Between August and October 1993 one female had a very small home area (only ca.  
2-3 km). The reason was that she had cubs and became restricted to this area for taking care of 
her offspring. 
The study area is a mosaic of lakes and water courses. Otters had good possibilities to 
choose suitable habitats to find food. They mainly used the lakes, but rivers and ditches were 
of significance during the winter, especially during January and February. Approximately 
30% of all otter observations were made in that kind of habitat.  These months compared to a 
maximum 10% of the observations in April to November 
 
2.6   Day and night activity 
 
As expected, otters in freshwater systems are nocturnal animals, with approximately 80% of 
the activity at night, compared to 15-20% during the day. With only small differences 
between seasons, approximately 40% of the 24-hour period is spent on activities. 
 
 
3.   CONCLUSIONS 
 
Important experiences from the project were that: 
 
• 
 radio-telemetry was an excellent tool to track individuals and to study different 
aspects of their biology such as movements, the size of home ranges, activity pattern, 
survival, death causes, etc. 
• 
 radio-telemetry provides relatively short range signals from the radio transmitter of a 
semi-aquatic species like the otter. The range of the signal will be even weaker if an 
implanted radio transmitter without external antenna is used, which has been a 
common type of transmitter in several otter projects. 
• 
 it is necessary to have access to an aeroplane for radio-tracking from the air to search 
for “missing” animals. 
• 
 Radio-telemetry is very time and personnel consuming especially when re-introduced 
otters are radio-tracked. The reason is that these animals can move long distances 


from the release site before becoming are established. Therefore they need to be 
radio-tracked intensely (at least once a day) during the phase of movement to avoid 
losing them.   
 
 
5.   REFERENCES 
 
KREBS, C. J. 1989. Ecological Methodology. Harper & Row, New York. 
MELQUIST W. E. & HORNOCKER, M. G. 1979a. Development and use of a telemetry technique for studying      
river otter. In Proceedings Second International Conference on Wildlife Biotelemetry (Edited by F. M. Long)      
Pp. 104-114. Laramie, WY. 
MELQUIST, W. E. & HORNOCKER, M. G. 1979b. Methods and techniques for studying and censusing river      
otter populations. University of Idaho, Contributions, No. 154: 1-17. 
MELQUIST, W. E. & HORNOCKER, M. G. 1983. Ecology of river otters in west central Idaho. Wildife.      
Monograph, 83: 1-60. 
POLLOCK, K. H., WINTERSTEIN, S. R. & CONROY, M. J. 1989a. Estimation and analysis of survival      
distributions for radio-tagged animals. Biometrics, 45: 99-109. 
POLLOCK, K. H., WINTERSTEIN, S. R., BUNCK, C. M. & CURTIS, P. D. 1989. Survival analysis in telemetry      
studies: the staggered entry design. Journal of  Wildlife Management, 53: 7-15. 
SANDELL, M. 1989. The mating tactics and spacing patterns of solitary carnivores. In Carnivore Behaviour,      
Ecology, and Evolution. (Edited by Gittleman, J.L.) Pp. 164-182. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York. 
SJÖÅSEN, T. 1996. Survivorship of captive-bred and wild-caught re-introduced European otters Lutra lutra in      
Sweden. Biological Conservation, 76: 161-165. 
SJÖÅSEN, T. 1997. Movements and establishment of re-introduced European otters (Lutra lutra). Journal of       
Applied Ecology, 34: 1070-1080 
 
 
