--- 
source: 2007 000n-49.pdf
--- 

 
1
OTTERS IN LATVIA:  A REVIEW OF STUDIES 
Jānis OZOLIĥŠ 
State Forest Service, 13. janvāra iela 15, Riga, LV-1932, Latvia 
email: Janis.Ozolins@vmd.gov.lv, vmi-riga@latnet.lv 
 
 
Looking at status reports on otter populations in Europe a few decades ago, one finds very 
little information about the status of the species in particular regions of the former Soviet 
Union (REUTHER, 1980).  Game statistics (KALNIĥŠ, 1943) confirm that before annexation to 
U.S.S.R., dynamics of the otter population in Latvia were similar to those in other parts of 
Central Europe.  However, after World War II the population increased rapidly (ORNICĀNS, 
1996) and was already thriving by the 1980s or somewhat earlier.  Meanwhile, in countries of 
western and central Europe, the species had become extinct from wide areas, with recovery in 
some abandoned areas starting much later (BRZEZŃSKI, ET AL., 1996; KRANZ AND TOMAN, 
2000).  
Surveys to assess biological reasons for the favourable otter status in Latvia were 
carried out from 1986 to 1997.  Mapping of spraints (faeces) and the presence of tracks on 
riverbanks, lakes, beaver ponds, drainage ditches, as well as near river estuaries along the sea 
coast showed that the species was distributed throughout the country (OZOLIĥŠ AND RANTIĥŠ, 
1992a,b; OZOLIĥŠ, KRANZ AND TOMAN 1998; OZOLIĥŠ, 1999).  Relative abundance of otters 
was studied during ice-free periods by simultaneously surveying both banks of rivers and 
counting all otter signs, regardless of their freshness. Patterns of distribution of secondary 
signs were obtained along nearly 2,000 kilometres of watercourses in a way similar to a 
classic study on the River Dee by JENKINS AND BURROWS (1980).  The river sections (one 
kilometre long) with the comparatively higher numbers of otter signs were considered as otter 
activity centres and their density per ten kilometres used as an index of population density. No 
statistically significant differences in densities were found dividing the rivers into large and 
small according to their width, nevertheless, we estimated that the headwater of a large river 
was more densely inhabited than lower reaches (OZOLIĥŠ, 1999).  
We also used a sample (n=113) of otters accidentally killed by beaver trappers 
(OZOLIĥŠ AND RANTIĥŠ, 1994, 1995) to obtain knowledge on population demography.  
Trapping bias against gender and age of eliminated specimens was considered as far as 
possible.  We concluded that the sex ratio in the otter population of Latvia is 1:1, a typical 
state for this species.  We found that only 38% of adult females held actual evidence of 
reproduction within a given year.  Breeding has been registered according to various signs, 
from February to October, however, the majority of records occurred in summer.  The average 
number of offspring was 2.69 ± 0.26 (n=13).  Taking into account the structure both of the 
otter population (OZOLIĥŠ, 1999) and suitable habitats (OZOLIĥŠ AND SJÖÅSEN, 1996; 
OZOLIĥŠ, 1997), it was calculated that on average, 4,000 otters inhabited Latvia.  Accidental 
killing by beaver trappers is still the main cause of mortality, but this annual rate does not 
exceed 10-15% of the population and so far is thought to be at a sustainable level. 
The spraints were collected both during the surveys for abundance indicators as well 
as by separate visits to certain habitats in certain seasons (OZOLIĥŠ, 1999).  The total sample 
(n=1,616) was divided and mutually compared among months and the four main habitat 
types: large rivers, small and medium-sized rivers, lakes, and coastal waters.  Occurrence of 
prey species was expressed as a percentage of relevant remains in the total identified prey 
amount (n=3,320).  A peculiarity found, is an extraordinary large proportion of amphibians 
(up to 90% from November to February, on average 40% during a year) and insects (up to 


 
2
20% during months of summer) in the diet (OZOLIĥŠ AND RANTIĥŠ, 1992 a, b; BIRZAKS, 
OZOLIĥŠ AND ORNICĀNS, 1998; OZOLIĥŠ, KRANZ AND TOMAN, 1998), indicating an example 
of comprehensive substitution of the main otter prey - fish.  Although the substitution 
phenomenon seems to be caused by the lack of main prey category (fish), we were not 
successful in  testing the correlation between the standing stock of fish in Latvia’s rivers and 
occurrence of fish remains in otter spraint (BIRZAKS, OZOLIĥŠ AND ORNICĀNS, 1998).  It was 
found that bottom dwelling animals, mostly frogs, but also sedentary and hibernating fish, 
made up the main share in the diet from November to March. Terrestrial and semi-aquatic 
animals, to a large extent frogs again, are of high importance in the rest of year, but 
particularly from June to August.  This seems to be contrary to the evolutionary predicted 
foraging specialisation of otters and can cause extra mortality by human factors (dogs, traffic 
etc.) and large predators because otters  move  more often  from the edge of the water.  The 
safest feeding conditions are in November when not more than 5% of identified prey had been 
caught on the bank (OZOLIĥŠ, 1999).  
A reason for the successful recovery of the otter population in Latvia could be a low 
concentration of toxic pollution, proved by Swedish colleagues (SJÖÅSEN ET AL., 1997).  This 
study supported the hypothesis that polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are one of the most 
important agents causing the decline of otter population in Europe (MASON, 1989).  Contrary 
to their position in food webs, otters, even at a high population density, are scarcely infected 
by parasitic helminths.  Six helminth species were discovered in otters in Latvia (VISMANIS 
AND OZOLIĥŠ, 2002).  According to the indices used in parasithological studies, the 
population is surprisingly little infected and not threatened by parasites. 
Our conclusion was that none of the preliminary supposed limiting factors are a threat 
to otters in Latvia; however, several peculiarities exist in that the ecology of the species 
appears to differ from other populations in Europe.  Otters in Latvia are no longer considered 
as priority species by conservationists and otter surveys have recently ceased due to the lack 
of institutional capacity.  Nevertheless, otters need careful monitoring and a well-developed 
management plan for the future. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
BIRZAKS, J., OZOLINŠ, J. & ORNICĀNS, A. 1998. Otter (Lutra lutra) diet related to abundance of fish in some of 
Latvia’s rivers. Proceedings of the Latvian Academy of Sciences. Section B, 52: 70-76. 
BRZEZŃSKI,, M., ROMANOWSKI, J., CYGAN, J.P. & PABIN B. 1996. Otter (Lutra lutra) distribution in Poland. 
Acta Theriologica, 41: 113-126. 
JENKINS, D. & BURROWS G.O. 1980. Ecology of otters in northern Scotland. III. The use of faeces as indicators 
of otter (Lutra lutra) density and distribution. Journal of Animal Ecology, 49: 755-774. 
KALNIĥŠ, A. 1943. Jäger in Livland, Kurland und Lettgallen. Latvju Gramata, Riga. 
KRANZ, A. & TOMAN, A. 2000. Otters recovering in man-made habitats in central Europe. In: Mustelids in a 
Modern World. Management and Conservation Aspects of Small Carnivores: Human Interactions (Edited by 
Griffiths, H.I.) Pp 163-183. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden. 
MASON, C.F. 1989. Water pollution and otter distribution: a review. Lutra, 32: 97-131. 
ORNICĀNS A. 1996. Legal status of the otter in Latvia. In: Seminar on the Conservation of the European Otter 
(Lutra lutra). Environmental Encounters, No. 24: 87-90. Council of Europe, Strasbourg.  
OZOLIĥŠ, J. 1997. Field control and description methods of otter (Lutra lutra) habitats in Latvia. In: 
Proceedings 14th Mustelid Colloquium. (Edited by Toman, A & Hlavač, V.) Pp 7-10. Prague. 
OZOLIĥŠ, J. 1999. Eurasian Otter (Lutra lutra L. 1758)  in the Freshwater and Riparian Ecosystems in Latvia. 
(Summary of thesis for doctoral degree in biology.) Latvijas Universitāte, Riga. 
OZOLINS, J., KRANZ, A.  &  TOMAN, A. 1998. Three men in a boat (to say nothing of the otter in Latvia).  IUCN 
Otter Specialist  Group Bulletin, 15: 103-108. 
OZOLIĥŠ, J. & RANTIĥŠ, M. 1992a. Einige Voraussetzungen zur heutigen Bestandsentwicklung und zur 
Verbreitung des Fischotters Lutra lutra L. in Lettland. In: Semiaquatische Säugetiere (Edited by  Schröpfer, R.  
Stubbe, M. & Heidecke, D.) Pp 365-384. Wiss. Beitr. Univ. Halle, Halle (Saale). 


 
3
OZOLIĥŠ, J. & RANTIĥŠ M. 1992b. The distribution and habitat conditions of the otter (Lutra lutra) in Latvia. 
In: Proceedings of the First Baltic Theriological Conference. Pp 186-196. Tartu Ülikool, Tartu. 
OZOLIĥŠ, J., & RANTIĥŠ, M. 1994. Otter survival in relation to beaver trapping in Latvia. Environmental 
Encounters, No. 17:121-122. Council of Europe, Strasbourg.  
OZOLIĥŠ, J. & RANTIĥŠ, M. 1995. The data on otter Lutra lutra population provided by beaver trapping in 
Latvia. Ekologija, 2: 64-69. Vilnius.  
OZOLIĥŠ, J. & SJÖÅSEN T. 1996. An approach to comparison of European Otter (Lutra lutra) habitats in areas 
with different status of population. In: Seminar on the Conservation of the European Otter (Lutra lutra). 
Environmental Encounters, No.  24: 165-168. Council of Europe, Strasbourg.  
REUTHER, C. 1980. Zur situation des fischotters in Europa. In: Der Fischotter in Europa: Verbreitung, 
Bedrohung, Erhaltung. (Edited by Reuther, C & Festetics, A.) Pp 71-92.  Selbstverlag, Oderhaus, Göttingen. 
SJÖÅSEN, T., OZOLIĥŠ, J. GREYERZ, E. &OLSSON, M. 1997. The otter (Lutra lutra) situation in Latvia and 
Sweden related to PCB and DDT levels. Ambio, 26: 4, 196-201. 
VISMANIS, K. & OZOLINS, J. 2002. Preliminary data on parasites of European Otter (Lutra lutra) in Latvia. In: 
Otter Conservation – an Example for a Sustainable Use of Wetlands. Proceedings of the Seventh International 
Otter Colloquium, Trebon, 14-19 March 1998. (Edited by Dulfer, R., Conroy, J.W.H., Nel, A.J. &  Gutleb, A.C.) 
IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 19A: 374-378. 
