--- 
source: 2007 000n-8.pdf
--- 

THE BORDERS BETWEEN BELGIUM, GERMANY AND LUXEMBOURG: A CHANCE FOR 
FUTURE RECOLONISATION OF THE OTTER IN EUROPE. 
(A project report) 
 
Michel FAUTSCH 
 
Parc Naturel Haute-Sûre Forêt d’Anlier Grand’Rue, 6  B-6630 Martelange,  Belgium 
email : michel@parcnaturel.be 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION  
 
The decline of the otter (Lutra lutra) was felt throughout much of Europe during the 
last century. At a local level, many core populations became isolated and finally extinct and at 
the beginning of the 1980s the situation had become particularly alarming. In 1986, a 
publication showed a large corridor of Europe where the status of the otter was considered to 
be “very scarce” (BOUCHARDY, 1986).  This included Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany 
and so several specialists gathered information about the status of the otter in that region. It 
now appears that the species never disappeared from some rivers. Although it is not possible 
to estimate the importance of these remaining populations, the absence of spraints over a long 
time period indicates that the density was most probably very low. In such situations, the only 
way to monitor population evolution is using tracks. These are principally searched for in 
snow when winter conditions are suitable.   
 An examination of existing literature highlighted that there had been no significant 
development of the otter population during the past twenty years (OVERAL, 1989; LIBOIS & 
HALLET, 1995; GROUPE LOUTRE LUXEMBOURG, 1997).  The species is still present in the area 
and prints have been discovered at several places during winter 2002-2003.  
 
2   STUDY AREA  
 
An awakening occurred about the precarious position of the otter some time ago and this 
project is a continuation of that and other initiatives which mainly took place in Belgium and 
Luxembourg. Three catchment areas are included in the project - the Ourthe, the Our and the 
Sûre. As the last two rivers flow through more than one country, the project is the result of 
trans-border collaboration between Belgium, Luxembourg and Germany. 
 
3   PROGRESS REPORT 
 
The first step of this project was the establishment of the trans-border collaboration. This was 
possible thanks to financial support from the European Commission and the Walloon 
Government in Belgium (Financed by STARTER LIFE-Nature, the recipient being Parc Naturel 
Haute-Sûre Forêt d’Anlier).  
At the same time of making contact with possible partners and other interested people, 
the recipient began a review of the scientific literature to define the regional status of the otter 
and identify the local threat to the species. Five principal threats were identified: 
a. Habit destruction (the most important),  
b.  Reduction of water quality, 
c. .Accidental mortality, 
d.  Destruction,  isolation  and fragmentation of the population, 
e.  Human disturbance.  


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  The river catchments used in the study 
 
This report made it possible to identify the sites and the actions to be undertaken to 
fight against the causes of this decline. The project will operate firstly in the Natura 2000 sites 
and proposes more than 30,000 hectares as ‘possible action sites’. (This large area is required 
due to the ecology of the otter and, amongst other things, the great displacements that can 
happen.)  
The proposed actions are varied and include: 
 
• 
restoration of woodland and farmland (cuting resinous trees, fences and 
plantations, creation and restoration of ponds, etc.); 
• 
installations at dams and bridges to allow otter movements; 
• 
purchase of land,  
Scale : 
 
  
  10 Km 
 
Limit of the  
hydrographic districts 
Affluents 
 
National border 
Principal  rivers 
 
Legend : 
Bassin  
hydrographique  
de la Sûre 
 
Luxembourg 
 
Ruisseau d’Heure 
Bassin hydrographique 
     de l’Our 
Belgium
 
Bassin  
hydrographique   
de l’Ourthe 
 
District 
hydrographique mosan
 
Germany
 
District 
hydrographique rhénan
 
Braunlauf 
Ulf 
Clerve 
Wiltz 
Strange 
Basseille 
Ourthe occidentale 
Ourthe Orientale 
Ourthe 
Our 
Sûre 


• 
monitoring of population evolution,  
• 
education (booklets, articles, CD-Rom and a discovery path, organisation of 
visits and information sessions, creation of an Internet site, etc.). 
 
During 2003, the LIFE-Nature Application File 2003 was completed for submission in 
September 2003. The European Commission will then decide if the project fits into its 
priorities. If it is accepted, the project, entitled Restoration of the European otter (Lutra lutra, 
L.) habitat in the valleys of the Our, the Ourthe and the Sûre (Belgium, Luxembourg and 
Germany). could begin during  2004 and will last for a period of four years. Although the 
principal species is the otter, many other species could also benefit. A large number of species 
dependent on wetlands are particularly endangered at European scale, including Ciconia 
nigra, Myotis myotis, Margaritifera margaritifera, Triturus cristatus, Oxygastra curtisii, etc., 
or at regional level, for example plants such as - Orchis spp, Ophrys spp, Arnica montana, 
Nardus stricta, Saxicola ruberta, Muscardinus avellarianus, etc.  
 
 
4   FUTURE  PARTNERS 
 
The project started with a network of seven natural parks (two in Germany, two in 
Luxembourg and three in Belgium) and they were already partners in the first step of the 
project. The large assets of these organisations include a detailed knowledge of the territory, 
the infrastructure available and the existence of working groups on different topics such as 
agriculture, environment and nature conservation, forestry, fishing, hunting.  Other partners 
contributed to discussions, including scientific institutions, local and regional administrations 
and local observers, and all of these will be involved in the project.  
The objective of this project is to restore the habitat in the valleys concerned in order 
to preserve the individuals who are still present and to improve the planned recolonisation.  
 
 
5   REFERENCES  
 
BOUCHARDY, C. 1986.  La Loutre.  Editions Sang de la Terre, Paris. 
GROUPE LOUTRE LUXEMBOURG 1997. Evaluation de la Qualité des Cours d’Eau au Luxembourg en tant 
qu’Habitat pour la Loutre.  Ministère de la Culture,  Luxembourg. 
LIBOIS, R. & HALLET, C. 1995.  Situation actuelle de la loutre en Belgique et problèmes de conservation.  
Cahiers d'Ethologie, 15: 157-168. 
OVERAL, B. 1989.  La Loutre dans la Haute-Sûre.  Bulletin de la Societie Naurale de. Luxembourg.  89, 7-19.   
 
