--- 
source: 2007 000n-26.pdf
--- 

 
1
CONTAMINATION BY SELECTED TRACE ELEMENTS (CD, CU, HG, SE AND ZN) OF 
THE EURASIAN OTTER (LUTRA LUTRA) FROM WESTERN FRANCE 
 
Gaëlle CASSEREAU 1, Paco BUSTAMANTE 1, RenÉ ROSOUX 2, Pierre MIRAMAND 1, Florence 
CAURANT 1 
 
1.  Laboratoire de Biologie et Environnement Marins, FRE 2727 du CNRS, Université de La Rochelle, 22, 
Avenue Michel Crépeau, F-17042 La Rochelle Cedex, France 
2.  Muséum des Sciences Naturelles, 6 rue Marcel Proust, F-45000 Orléans, France.  email:belrose@9online.fr 
 
Abstract: Forty-two otters were collected in the western wetlands of France. Demographic characteristics and 
health status of the otter population were determined. Several trace elements – Cd, Cu, Hg, Se and Zn - were 
analysed by atomic absorption spectrometry, in liver, kidney and muscle tissue samples. Fur and brain were also 
analysed for Hg. No effect of sex was observed for the body distribution of all the elements. Cd and Hg 
concentrations in tissues were significantly higher (P< 0.05) in adults than in yearlings. These two metals are 
the most likely to give rise to toxicological effects in top predators. However for all the individuals, Cd and Hg 
concentrations in the different organs and tissues were much lower than tissue levels inducing clinical signs of 
intoxication, with maximum values reaching 0.52 µg Cd.g-1 fresh weight in kidney and 4.36 µg Hg.g-1 fresh 
weight in liver. Highly significant (P<0.05) correlation between Hg concentrations in fur and the internal 
tissues strongly suggest the excretion of this metal through hairs. 
 
Keywords: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, heavy metals, bioaccumulation, body distribution, top predator, wetlands, 
France 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
Otter populations have declined since the beginning of the 20th century in most European 
regions.  This has been typically attributed to the degradation and modification of their 
habitats, but pollution of the environment could also have affected this predator at the top of 
the food chain.  Organic and metallic pollutants are therefore of concern for Eurasian otters 
(Lutra lutra) in all European countries. 
In France, two otter populations have remained stable since the animal was classified 
as a protect species in 1976.  The first occupies the Massif Central and the second, the 
wetlands along the Atlantic Coast.  However, these populations represent only a few thousand 
individuals (ROSOUX ET AL., 1996). 
The aim of this study was to determine the concentrations of selected heavy metals 
and their distribution in the organs and tissues of Eurasian otters from the wetlands of western 
France.  Cadmium (Cd), Copper (Cu), Mercury (Hg), Selenium (Se) and Zinc (Zn) were 
analysed to evaluate their impact on otter health. Biological and ecological factors affecting 
the trace element concentrations were also considered. 
 
 
2   MATERIALS AND METHODS 
2.1 Sampling and sample preparation 
Forty-two adult otters were collected in the western part of France between 1993 and 2001 
(Figure 1).  All were found dead, most being road-kills.  Necropsies were carried out to 
collect biometrical and pathological information, determine body weight and length, collect 
tissues samples (liver, kidney, brain, muscles) and hair for toxicological investigations, and 
teeth for age determination (Table 1). 
 


 
2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Location of the Eurasian otters collected in the western wetlands of France between 1993 and 2001. 
 
 
Lay
♂ 
♀ 
♀ 
Sèvre Niortaise
Curé
Boutonne
Arnoult
Charente
Seugne
Seudre
Dordogne
Garonne
Carcans pond
Lacanau pond
Oléron Island
Ré Island
Female
Male
♂ 
♂ 
♂ 
♂ 
♀ 
♀ 
♀ 
♀ 
♀ 
♀ 
♂ 
♂ 
♂ 
♂ ♂ 
♀ ♀ 
♂ 
♂ 
♀ 
♀ 
♀ 
♀ 
♀ 
♂ 
3 ♀ 
2♀ + 2 ♂
1♂ 
2 ♀ + 1 ♂ 
Sampling areas 
Legend : 
♂ 
♂ 
Charente Maritime 
wetlands
Poitevin 
wetlands 
Bay of 
Biscay 
See beside 
♂ 
♀
♂ 
♂ 


 
3
These tissues were then freeze-dried and reduced to a homogenous powder.  Samples 
of fur were cleaned in series of three-10 minute acetone-water-acetone baths (PINEAU, 1987) 
and then dried at 50°C over a few hours. 
 
Table 1. Numbers, sex and age structure of Eurasian otters collected in western France 
 
Sex 
 
Juvenile 
Sub-adults 
Adults 
Non-determined 
Total 
Female 
N 
5 
4 
12 
1 
22 
 
% 
11.9 
9.5 
28.6 
2.4 
52.3 
Male 
N 
3 
3 
14 
0 
20 
 
% 
7.1 
7.1 
33.3 
0 
47.7 
Totals 
N 
8 
7 
26 
1 
42 
 
% 
19.0 
16.7 
61.9 
2.4 
 
 
Age classes are : juveniles (<1.5 years); sub-adults (1.5 to 3 years); adults (>3 years)  
N = sample size. 
2.2 Analytical procedures 
Two aliquots of approximately 200 milligrams of dry tissue were digested by 3.5 millilitres of 
suprapure, 65 per cent nitric acid at 60°C until the solution was clear.  Trace elements were 
analysed by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry. Cadmium, copper, selenium and zinc 
concentrations were determined in liver, kidney and muscle samples with a Varian 
spectrophotometer Spectra 250 Plus using deuterium background correction.  Mercury was 
analysed in the same tissues as well as in fur and brain with Altec spectrophotometer AMA 
254.  Standard samples (n=5 per standard) from the NRCC, DOLT-2 (dogfish liver) and 
DORM-2 (dogfish muscle) were also analysed following the same procedure as the samples.  
Recoveries of the metals were 99% (Cd), 95% (Cu), 99% (Hg), 93% (Se) and 99% (Zn).  
Metal concentrations in organs and tissues are reported in µg.g-1 wet weight, except for fur 
(µg.g-1 dry weight). 
 
2.3 Statistical analysis 
Differences between trace element concentrations were determined by ANOVA models to test 
effect of sex and age with the Minitab 13.1 software.  However, non-parametric Kruskal-
Wallis test was used when variance equality was not verified. Linear correlations between 
trace elements were performed with the Pearson test.  The significance level for statistical 
analyses was always set at α =0.05.  
 
 
3   RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Statistical analyses have shown that trace element concentrations in the different organs and 
tissues did not differ significantly between male and female.  Regarding essential elements, 
the liver was the main organ of bioaccumulation for Cu and Zn, although the highest Zn 
concentration was found in muscle (Table 2).  Kidneys displayed higher Se concentrations 
than liver. 
 
Table 2. Mean ± SD of trace elements concentrations (µg.g-1 wet weight) in the organs and tissues collected 
from 42 Eurasian otters from western France. 
 
Tissue 
N 
 
Cd 
Cu 
Hg 
Se 
Zn 
Liver 
34 
Mean± SD 
0.037 ± 0.04 
8.48 ± 4.23 
2.27 ± 1.21 
1.36 ± 0.51 
31.6 ± 13.1 
 
 
Range 
0.004 – 0.200 
1.54 – 23.1 
0.431 – 4.36 
0.566 – 2.82 
16.3 – 82.0 
Kidney 
35 
Mean± SD 
0.093 ± 0.10 
2.85 ± 0.53 
1.19 ± 0.75 
1.55 ± 0.32 
17.1 ± 5.4 


 
4
 
 
Range 
0.007 – 0.515 
1.84 – 4.49 
0.208 – 3.18 
0.750 – 2.16 
11.8 – 39.8 
Muscle 
42 
Mean± SD 
0.004 ± 0.002 
1.94 ± 0.33 
0.686 ± 0.40 
< 0.2 
33.7 ± 5.8 
 
 
Range 
0.002 – 0.019 
1.02 – 2.61 
0.218 – 2.19 
- 
22.7 – 53.3 
Brain 
21 
Mean± SD 
ND 
ND 
0.359 ± 0.23 
ND 
ND 
 
 
Range 
 
 
0.051 – 0.956 
 
 
Fur 
40 
Mean± SD 
ND 
ND 
15.5 ± 10.4a 
ND 
ND 
 
 
Range 
 
 
1.22 – 43.1 a 
 
 
 
a: results expressed in µg.g-1 dry weight 
N : sample size ; ND = non determined 
 
Globally, the distribution and concentrations of Cu and Zn in French otters were in 
agreement with existing data about mammals in general and Mustelidae in particular.  Indeed, 
Mustelidae typically exhibit higher Zn concentrations in muscle than in liver, which is 
unusual for mammals.  Similar results have been reported for the Canadian river otter Lontra 
canadensis and American mink Mustela vison (HALBROOK ET AL., 1996).  However, Cu, Se 
and Zn had low coefficients of variation (<50%), suggesting homeostatic regulation.  The 
only otters considerably exceeding the mean concentrations of Cu or Zn were in very poor 
condition, with loss of weight, amyotrophy and clinical signs of chronic disorders.  Thus, 
variations in the essential element concentrations should therefore be attributed to the 
physiological status.  However, variations between populations from different European areas 
may be due to soil characteristics (GUTLEB ET AL., 1998; MASON AND STEPHENSON, 2001). 
With regard to concentrations of non-essential elements, the highest levels of Hg were 
found in fur and the lowest in brain, while kidney showed the highest Cd concentrations 
among organs and tissues (Table 2).  Cd concentrations in the different tissues exhibited a 
great variability among otters from western France.  Nevertheless, the values remained 
relatively low, with a maximum of 0.52 µg.g-1 wet weight in kidney.  This value is close to 
the maximum reported in kidney of European otters from the United Kingdom and central 
Europe (MASON, LAST AND MACDONALD, 1986; MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; MASON 
AND REYNOLDS, 1988; GUTLEB ET AL., 1998; MASON AND STEPHENSON, 2001).  However, Cd 
concentrations in both liver and kidney are at far lower toxic levels as determined for other 
mammals (20 and 50 µg.g-1 wet weight in liver and in kidney, respectively (ELINDER AND 
JÄRUP, 1996) probably because the otters analysed were relatively young (<5 years old).  
Moreover, exposure to Cd through fish consumption appears to be very low since these prey 
generally displayed very low Cd body burden. 
In contrast to Cd, which was accumulated significantly (P<0.05) with age only in 
liver, Hg concentrations were higher in adults for liver, kidney and muscle (F = 5.31, P = 
0.030; F = 7.78, P = 0.010; F = 4.79, P = 0.036 respectively).  The maximum value was 4.36 
µg.g-1 wet weight which is below concentrations reported for England (20.5 µg.g-1 wet 
weight.), Orkney Islands (20.3 µg.g-1 wet weight) or Czech Republic (55.6 µg.g-1 dry weight.) 
(MASON, LAST AND MACDONALD, 1986, MASON AND REYNOLDS, 1988; GUTLEB ET AL., 1998).  
Thus, Hg in French otters did not reach toxic concentrations, which are close to 25-30 µg.g-1 
wet weight in liver or kidney, and exceed 5 µg.g-1 wet weight in muscle or brain (AULERLICH, 
RINGER AND IWAMOTO, 1974).  High Hg concentrations in fur indicates that moult may be a 
good way for its elimination. This hypothesis is strongly supported by highly significant 
correlation between Hg concentrations in fur and internal organs (e.g. R = 0.748, P <0.0005 
and R = 0.632, P = 0.002, for liver and brain, respectively) (Figure 2).  Interest for analysis of 
heavy metals, particularly Hg, in fur has already been demonstrated as a non-invasive method 
for biomonitoring (EVANS ET AL., 1998, 2000). However, several individuals of our study 
displayed higher Hg concentrations in liver than in fur (Figure 2). This may reveal a recent 
and high exposure to Hg, not yet eliminated in fur. These observations suggest that otters may 


 
5
achieve relatively high Hg accumulation at least for short period of time, which may affect 
resistance to others pollutants. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
0
10
20
30
40
50
Hg in fur (µg.g-1 dwt)
Hg in liver (µg.g-1 dwt)
R=0.75
 
Figure 2. Correlation between Hg concentrations (µg.g-1 dwt) in fur and liver of Eurasian otters from western 
France 
Ellipse notices animals having higher Hg concentrations in liver than in fur. 
 
 
4   CONCLUSIONS 
 
Otters from the wetlands of western France displayed heavy metal concentrations in their 
tissues far below the toxic concentrations reported for other mammal species.  However, 
effects of micro-doses of toxic metals are still to be investigated.  Furthermore, heavy metal 
interactions with persistent organic pollutants such as PCBs or DDT should also be of concern 
for these endangered animals. 
 
 
5   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
We are grateful to W. Dabin for age determination. This study was supported financially by 
the SFEPM (Société Française pour l’Etude et la Protection des Mammifères), the DIREN 
Poitou-Charentes, the Conseil Régional Poitou-Charentes and the MHNLR (Muséum 
d’Histoire Naturelle de La Rochelle). 
 
6   REFERENCES  
AULERICH, R.J., RINGER, R.K. & IWAMOTO, S. 1974. Effects of dietary mercury on mink. Archives of 
Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 2: 43-51. 
ELINDER, C. & JÄRUP, L. 1996. Cadmium exposure and health risk : recent findings. Ambio, 25: 370-373. 
EVANS, R.D., ADDISON, E.M., VILLENEUVE, J.Y., MACDONALD, K.S. & JOACHIM, D.G. 1998. An 
examination of spatial variation in mercury concentrations in otter (Lutra canadensis) in south-central Ontario. 
The Science of the Total Environment, 213: 239-245. 


 
6
EVANS, R.D., ADDISON, E.M., VILLENEUVE, J.Y., MACDONALD, K.S. & JOACHIM, D.G. 2000. Distribution of 
inorganic and methyl mercury among tissues in mink (Mustela vison) and otter (Lutra canadensis). 
Environmental Research, 84: 133-139. 
GUTLEB, A.C., KRANZ, A., NECHAY, G. & TOMAN, A. 1998. Heavy metal concentrations in livers and kidneys 
of the otter (Lutra lutra) from Central Europe. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 60: 
273-279. 
HALBROOK, R.S., WOOLF, A., HUBERT, G.I., ROSS, J.R.S. & BASELTON, W.E. 1996. Contaminant 
concentrations in Illinois mink and otter. Ecotoxicology, 5: 103-114. 
MASON, C.F. & MACDONALD, S.M. 1986. Otters, Ecology and Conservation. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
MASON, C.F. & REYNOLDS, P. 1988. Organochlorine residues and metals in otters from the Orkney Islands. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin, 19: 80-81. 
MASON, C.F. & STEPHENSON, A. 2001. Metals in tissues of European otter (Lutra lutra) from Denmark, Great 
Britain and Ireland. Chemosphere, 44: 351-353. 
MASON, C.F., LAST, N.I. & MACDONALD, S.M. 1986. Mercury, cadmium and lead in British otters. Bulletin of 
Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 37: 844-849. 
PINEAU, A. 1987. Contribution à l'Étude de l'Élimination des Éléments Traces par les Produits de la Sécrétion 
Pilaire. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Nantes, France. 
ROSOUX, R., TOURNEBIZE, T., MAURIN, H. & BOUCHARDY, C. 1996. Étude de la répartition de la loutre 
d'Europe (Lutra lutra L.) en France. In: La loutre et le vison d'Europe. Acts XVII Internationale Mammalogie 
Colloquium, Niort 23-25 Octobre 1993 (Edited by Gautier, J.Y., Libois, R. & Rosoux, R.) Cahiers d'Ethologie, 
15: 195-205. 
 
 
 
 
 
