--- 
source: 2007 000n-30.pdf
--- 

 
1
SCENT MARKING BEHAVIOUR IN THE EURASIAN OTTER (LUTRA LUTRA) IN THE 
HULA NATURE RESERVE, ISRAEL 
 
Amichai GUTER 1,3, David SALTZ 2, Noga KRONFELD-SCHOR 1 & Amit DOLEV 2,3
 
  
1  Department of Zoology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
 
 2  Mitrani Department for Desert Ecology, Jacob Blaustein Institute for Desert Research, Ben Gurion 
University of the Negev, Israel.
 
3  Israel Mammal Center, the Society for the Protection of Nature in Israel, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
 
il
.
ac
.
tau
.
guteram@post
: 
mail
e
 
 
 
Abstract: Because otters live at low densities and are mostly nocturnal, determining their distribution and 
abundance is complicated.  Scent marking provides a relatively easy means of indirectly assessing populations 
over time. Consequently, otter surveys are based on identification of indirect but very characteristic signs, such 
as spraints. We were interested to know the reliability of spraints and footprints as an indicator of otter visits to 
a marking site. Specifically we asked: Is the absence of fresh spraints indicative of no visits? Is the number of 
fresh spraints correlated to the number of visits?  Can spraints be indicative of activity levels? Understanding 
these patterns can be a first step in assessing abundance based on spraints. We monitored 29 permanent 
sprainting sites by counting spraints and  video filming at night. Video taping was conducted for 34  full nights 
from September 2002 to March 2003. Following each night, the number of spraints was counted. We conclude 
that spraints appear to be a good indicator of the intensity of use of a specific latrine and consequently a 
possible indicator of habitat preference. Understanding what determines scent-marking behaviour, and its 
relationship to actual activity and presence can improve our assessment of the population and, hence, 
conservation programmes. 
 
Keywords: Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, spraints, scent marking, Israel 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
In Israel, as in many other parts of their range, Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) are largely 
nocturnal, solitary and elusive; therefore, most of our knowledge about this species is 
obtained from indirect signs, such as footprints and spraints (faeces).  HUTCHINGS AND WHITE 
(2000) state that although most behavioural patterns are difficult to observe, scent marking 
provides a relatively easy means of indirectly assessing populations over time.  Field surveys 
were developed, during the late 1970s, to study the distribution of the otter.  The method was 
quickly adopted and several attempts to estimate relative abundance and habitat selection 
were done (MACDONALD AND MASON, 1983).  However, the question of whether or not 
spraints can give a reliable picture of population status is still debated (MASON AND 
MACDONALD, 1987 and 1991 vs. KRUUK AND CONROY, 1987).  This question of whether otter 
signs, such as spraints, may indicate abundance is extremely important because of the 
significant role of spraints in distribution surveys.  While MASON AND MACDONALD (1987) 
showed that spraint densities can be used to define the status of otter populations, KRUUK AND 
CONROY (1987) claim that the number of spraints found is meaningless unless proper 
sampling methods are used, and urge that more studies should be carried out to test this 
methodology. 
The use of any index requires validation by correlating it to the actual variable of 
interest (SOUTHERLAND, 2000).  Standard otter surveys regularly rely on spraints and are a 
key component in determining the status and distribution of otters throughout Europe.  The 
first step, therefore, in evaluating spraint surveys and validating them as any kind of index, is 
to determine the most basic relationship – does the presence or absence of spraints and the 


 
2
number of spraints reflect actual visitation. Here, we explore this relationship between the 
occurrence of spraints and otter visits to a marking site. Specifically we wanted to know:  
 
1. Is the absence of fresh spraints indicative of no visits?  
2. Is the number of fresh spraints correlated to the number of visits?  
3. Can spraints be indicators of activity levels?   
 
 
2   MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Our study was conducted in the Hula Nature Reserve, in northern Israel (32051'N 035005'E).  
It is one of three areas, where otters still exist in Israel.  It is about 300 hectares of a man-
made wetland left from the drained Hula Lake.  Located in the Jordan Rift Valley, the site 
consists of open water, permanent and intermittent pools with fringing reed beds, freshwater 
marshes, riparian forest and wet meadows. Hula Nature Reserve is an important site for many 
waterfowl species, raptors, and mammals. Human activities at the site are limited, and hunting 
and fishing are forbidden.  
We monitored 29 permanent latrines in the Hula reserve for fresh spraints, twice a 
week on consecutive days, from September 2002 to March 2003.  We recorded the number of 
fresh spraints at each latrine, and categorised each latrine by vegetation density, human 
interference, and location within the reserve. 
Two sets of night vision (infra-red) scopes (12V MTV-D-54KO 1/4" day & night 
camera, Mintron Enterprise Co.) were used to record otter activity at sprainting sites. Cameras 
were set randomly at ten out of the 29 known latrines, on poles at heights of 0-2 metres above 
water level.  A visit was defined as the detection of an otter by a video camera.  Otter activity 
was recorded and analysed according to various aspects: time of visit, number of visits per 
night, type of visit (swimming, surfacing and sprainting) and the number of individuals per 
visit.  Thirty-four full nights of video taping were carried out during the study period.  
Following each night we visited the sites and counted the number of fresh spraints.  
 
 
3   RESULTS 
 
3.1 Night-time video filming 
The camera recorded otters on 30 of the 34 nights (88.2%).  In 14 instances, one visit was 
recorded per night, while on 16 nights 2-13 visits were recorded. Altogether 72 visits were 
recorded. In 35 (49%), sprainting occurred, in 16 (22%), the animal surfaced but no sprainting 
was recorded, and on 21 (29%)  otters did not surface and just swam past the latrine. In other 
words, otters left spraints in 35 out of 51 (69%) "surfacing visits" (n=51).  
 
3.2 Correlation between night-time filming and spraints monitoring 
A significant correlation (P<0.03, r=0.47) was observed between the number of visits to 
latrines recorded by the video camera and the number of fresh spraints found the following 
morning (Figure 1).  No relationship was found when the number of spraints was regressed on 
the number of visits (P >0.05) when "swimming visits" were included. 


 
3
R2 = 0.225
R2 = 0.113
0
1
2
3
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Number of visits per night
Number of fresh spraints per night
linear, visits when animal surfaced
linear, including swimming visits
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  There was a significant correlation (P<0.03, R=0.47) between the number of otters’ visits at night and 
the number of fresh spraints in the morning, but only when swimming visits were excluded. 
 
On ten mornings, no fresh spraints were found in the latrines;  on five of these, no visits were 
recorded by the camera during the preceding night, while on the other five there was at least 
one visit.  There was a considerable variance in the number of spraints per latrine and in the 
number of visits. 
 
4   DISCUSSION 
 
In this study we combined two different methods in order to learn more about the scent 
marking behavior of otters.  The first (video taping) provided a true picture of otter activity at 
marking sites during the night, while the second showed the exact number of fresh spraints 
deposited at the same latrines.  This enabled us to correlate the number of spraints found in 
the morning, and the number of visits during the night.  With this, we could assess the validity 
of spraints as an activity index. 
 
The significant correlation between the number of visits to latrines, recorded by the 
video camera, and the number of fresh spraints found the following morning means that the 
number of spraints is a fair estimate of the otters’ activity during the night.  By contrast, the 
absence of fresh spraints as an indication of ‘no visit’ was true for only 50% of the time; i.e., 
the lack of spraints cannot be used as an indication of otter activity or inactivity. 
Spraints are often used as an index of otter activity, population status and habitat use 
(MASON AND MACDONALD, 1987; PRENDA AND GRANADO- LORENCIO, 1996; HUTCHINGS AND 
WHITE, 2000) but their value for these purposes is disputed (KRUUK AND CONROY, 1987; 
KRUUK, 1995).  RUIZ-OLMO ET AL. (2001) summarised: a) the number of spraints does not 
enable us to estimate easily the number of otters, although some findings tend to show that, b) 
the absence of signs does not necessarily imply absence of otters, and c) the number of signs 
in any one place does not necessarily correlate with the intensity of use.  However, they did 
find that when there were several otters in an area, more signs were detected and hence that 
the number of spraints could indicate otter abundance.  HUTCHINGS AND WHITE (2000) state 
that although the absence of spraints cannot be used to infer an absence of otters, a lack of 


 
4
spraints does imply that the need for communication is reduced and that otter density might 
be relatively low. 
According to our results, video filming in combination with counting fresh spraints, 
can be a fair way to estimate the otter population status.  Counting spraints alone appears to 
be good indicator of the intensity of use of a specific latrine and consequently could be used 
to estimate numbers of otters visiting a specific point or of the stretches more suitable to be 
visited.  Latrines or stretches that are visited more often may indicate preference of 
characteristics in that area or even an increase in the need for communication due to high otter 
density.  However, there is a considerable variance suggesting the need for a sufficient sample 
size in order to obtain reliable results.  Being a preliminary study, an extensive, large-scale 
study is needed to enlarge the sample size and to increase reliability of the index.  
 
5   REFERENCES 
 
 
 
HUTCHINGS, M.R. & WHITE, P.C.L. 2000. Mustelid scent-marking in managed ecosystems: implications for 
population management. Mammal Review,  30: 157-169. 
KRUUK, H. 1995. Wild Otters. Predation and Populations. Oxford University Press, Oxford.  
KRUUK, H. & CONROY, J.W.H. 1987. Surveying otter populations: a discussion of problems with spraints.  
Biological Conservation, 41: 179-183. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1983. Some factors influencing the distribution of otters (Lutra lutra). 
Mammal Review, 13: 1-10. 
MASON, C.F. & MACDONALD, S.M. 1987. The use of spraints for surveying otter Lutra lutra populations: An 
evaluation. Biological Conservation, 41: 167-177. 
PRENDA, J. & GRANADO-LORENCIO, C. 1996. The relative influence of riparian habitat structure and fish 
availability on otter Lutra lutra L. sprainting activity in a small Mediterranean catchment. Biological 
Conservation, 76: 9-15. 
RUIZ-OLMO, J., SAAVEDRA, D. & JIMENEZ, J. 2001. Testing the surveys and visual and track censuses of 
Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra). Journal of Zoology, London, 253: 359-369. 
SOUTHERLAND, W.J. 2000. The Conservation Handbook: Research, Management and Policy. Blackwell 
Science, Oxford. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
