--- 
source: 2007 000n-16.pdf
--- 

STATUS OF THE EURASIAN OTTER, LUTRA LUTRA, IN TURKEY, AND EXPERIENCES 
WITH ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL OTTER DATABASE 
 
Heike THOL-SCHMITZ (Bahar Suseven) 
 
Kavak Sok. 7, 48640 Akyaka/Ula, Turkey  email: heike@akyaka.org 
 
Abstract. This paper describes the establishment of an electronic database for records of the Eurasian otter in 
Turkey with the aim of fostering both scientific research and conservation, as well as increasing public 
awareness. The database is available through the Internet, and went on-line in 2002.  It currently contains 195 
otter records, classified according to the experience of observer.  The database stimulates the interchange of 
information among various experts and aims to assist co-operative work.  The results show that the otter is 
distributed throughout Turkey.  Concentrations of records in some areas, such as the Aegean and some parts of 
the Black Sea Region, can be explained by the activity pattern of observers, rather than by a greater abundance 
of the species there.  Whereas records come from a wide spectrum of habitats such as rivers, creeks, lakes and 
river deltas, it seems that barrage lakes are not inhabited by otters. Few records come from areas above 1,000 
metres a.s.l. The species is threatened throughout the country and is still hunted.  Pollution is thought to have a 
major effect on the status and distribution pattern, but there are a few records from relatively polluted lakes in 
western Turkey. 
 
 
Keywords. Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, database, information management, public awareness building, 
distribution, Turkey, Middle East 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Despite global research on the semi-aquatic Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra), many aspects of its 
biology and ecology remain unknown because of its normally nocturnal activity pattern.  
Even less understood is the status of the species in Turkey: its abundance, population, habitats 
and behaviour are, despite a few recent studies (EROĞLU, 1996; ÖZTÜRK 1998), widely 
unknown (FOSTER-TURLEY, MACDONALD AND MASON, 1990; MACDONALD AND MASON 
1994) 
Over the past 50 years Turkey has lost 75% of its wetlands, mainly through 
agricultural development and it is concluded that this loss of habitat has had a highly 
significant impact on the population of the Eurasian otter.  However, sound scientific data to 
demonstrate this population decline are, unfortunately, not available (COUNCIL OF EUROPE, 
1994, 1996).  Even the past and present distribution patterns are unknown.  There are only a 
few scientists interested in otters in Turkey, and the exchange of information between them is 
very limited.  To help overcome this shortcoming, we established a National Otter Database 
(NFDB), which aims to change this scientific attitude through a participatory approach and by 
recording, collecting and disseminating data, thus creating an atmosphere of team spirit 
(THOL-SCHMITZ, SCHMITZ AND GÜVEN-VERYERI, 2002).  Here, the structure and organisation 
of the National Otter Database is described, together with the first results. 
An initial step to protect the otter in Turkey was taken by the Authority for the 
Protection of Specially Protected Areas (APSA) in the late 1990s, when it began, together 
with a local NGO, to promote the otter as a flagship species of the Specially Protected Area of 
Gökova.  This was the area where I had been working on the species for over ten years.  
Parallel to these efforts, the Turkish Society for the Protection of Nature (Türkiye Tabiati 
Koruma Derneği, TTKD) declared the year 1998 an “Otter Protection Year”, and the first 
National Otter Symposium was held at Antalya in 1999.  The second symposium, held again 
in Antalya, followed in 2002, and a third is scheduled for autumn 2005, to be held at 
Akyaka/Gökova.  These symposia proved to be very important, particularly for exchanging 


 
knowledge and creating joint efforts.  The first results of the database were presented during 
the conference in 2002, and attracted great interest.  
 
 
2   OTTER SURVEY METHODS 
 
Otters are difficult to survey, and assessment methods are different from those applied to most 
other mammals. For otters, spraint surveys are the usual method (KRUUK, 1986; MACDONALD 
AND MASON, 1983) and numbers of individuals are not necessarily a relevant criterion.  The 
usual objective is to obtain an overall assessment of the status of the species, according to its 
habitat or ecosystem, not a count.  Since short-term otter surveys are based on recording 
spraints and tracks, the only conclusions concerning population size are to be drawn from the 
number and the freshness of spraints, tracks and differences in defecation habits.  In the 
literature, spraints are seen sometimes as a guide to distribution, but not as a reliable reflection 
of their abundance (CHANIN, 1993; KRUUK ET AL., 1986); however, some researchers believe 
there is a close relationship between the density of spraints and otter abundance (MACDONALD 
AND MASON, 1986) or are at least very positive about the existence of this relationship 
(STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996).  We, too, tend to the latter opinion.  We have a long 
experience in otter studies, and we were able to study behaviour and sprainting habits of one 
individual and her cubs over a period of 11 years (THOL-SCHMITZ, 2000).  During this time 
we conducted surveys in various other areas (unpublished observations), and these led us to 
the conclusion that there is indeed a positive relationship between the density of spraints, 
sprainting behaviour and abundance of otters. 
We therefore generally use the internationally acknowledged ‘Macdonald Survey 
Method’ (MACDONALD, 1983) for overall otter assessments, and it has provided good results.  
The general idea is that if a randomly chosen transect of 600 metres along the bank of river or 
lake within a 10 kilometre area turns out to be negative, the first record is noted as zero 
population. In extensive surveys with a great area to cover you might leave it at that, and 
generally put a zero result in brackets for further verification. There are various reasons for a 
momentarily lack of spraints that do not necessarily lead to the conclusion of the area not 
being inhabited by otters.  
A slightly different technique was employed during the English otter survey of 1991–
1994, using a length of 600 metres per 6-8 kilometres of survey site (CHANIN, 1993; 
STRACHAN AND JEFFERIES, 1996). Based on the ‘Macdonald Survey Method’ and our long-
standing survey experience, we developed a special method of systematically “fine combing” 
an area, according to its habitat characteristics at specific sites (THOL-SCHMITZ, H. & 
SCHMITZ, T., 2005). The question of otter survey methodology has been discussed in great 
detail elsewhere (REUTER ET AL., 2000) 
 
 
3   RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
3.1 The establishment of a National Otter Data Base (NFDB) 
The NFDB started as a working group with the following objectives: 
• 
Development of a network of researchers and people interested in the Eurasian otter in 
Turkey.  Free exchange of information among the members of the network. 
• 
Setting priorities for field surveys.  In addition to obvious “hot spots” for otters in 
Turkey, the identification of additional sites.  This should lead to a much better and 
effective development of strategies or policies for site and species protection. 


 
• 
Contributing to the development of KBAs (Key Biodiversity Areas), for which otters 
are important indicators. Considerable efforts are being made in Turkey to identify 
KBAs, as the identification of IBAs (Important Bird Areas) and IPAs (Important Plant 
Areas) have achieved good results (KILIÇ AND EKEN, 2004; ÖZHATAY, BYFIELD AND 
ATAY, 2003). 
• 
Monitoring the otter population in Turkey, along with human impacts and threats. 
• 
Collecting the scattered information on otters in Turkey.   
 
On the database’s website, all papers and notes are being collated and a mechanism to assess 
them established.  A list of researchers and ongoing and completed projects is also available.  
News and the results of new studies are added on a regular basis. 
At the beginning, the NFDB Working Group began to promote the idea of a Turkish 
database about the otter on the Internet.  International contacts throughout the Mediterranean 
have been made during internet-based working meetings.  The idea of the database has also 
been promoted at several symposia, conferences and meetings.  Special care was taken with 
the database concerning safety for data transfer, sharing and storing.   Group membership is 
based on personal contacts or references.  The group tries to achieve a transparent 
environment, and is open to all scientists, conservationists, and interested laymen.  Data are 
available only to group members. A list of people working on otters and/or on wetland 
conservation has been prepared.  The members of the NFDB vouch for an ethically correct 
and independent treatment of data and thus set an example for the productive exchange of 
information between all participants. 
The email groups’ discussion could not be maintained on a permanent basis, as the 
members clearly had no interest in active participation. In other subjects such as birding or 
general protection, these email chains have proved to be very successful in Turkey and are an 
indispensable means for communication.  
A key objective is to create awareness of the otter and its conservation needs.  
Conservation of the species is being promoted on every occasion, especially at meetings, 
workshops, conferences, etc.  A simple recording sheet has been developed, and distributed 
widely at several meetings, and is also available through the Internet.  Posters are being 
prepared and plans for a comprehensive field survey developed, but these projects still wait 
funding.  At present, field research is conducted either as a private initiative or on request 
from, and in co-operation with, other NGOs (e.g. Doğa Derneği, Ankara).  
 
3.2 Data handling 
 
Fieldwork and data collecting for the NFDB is conducted under international standards by 
means of an internationally acknowledged method (Macdonald’s).  With this, population 
tables can be drawn from the abundance of spraints.  One of the advantages of the Macdonald 
method is the ease of learning and application.  It is nevertheless important that all field 
researchers apply the same method. 
The people providing information have been classified according to experience.  
Group A: otter experts;  
Group B: knowledgeable, active fieldworkers and experts;    
Group C: interested laymen, but not necessarily with knowledge of otters.   
 
The same data recording sheet is used by all three groups.  Whereas the information provided 
by the first two is accepted as reliable, the records of the third group need confirmation and 
verification by an expert.  According to experience in Germany, records provided by persons 
from Group C are not reliable enough for further analysis, but this group has an indispensable 
influence on awareness building (REUTER, 1993). 


 
Data are collected by email and through the website of NFDB, as well as by fax or 
phone.  They are shown on UTM-based maps (Data Grid System) using standard 100 x 100 
kilometre squares.  In addition, a Data Reference System is used to link the name of the 
observer to the record.  This simplifies personal communication between the participants and 
makes references easier.  For security reasons these data are only accessible via a password 
and safety system. 
Published data are also included in the database.  In addition, NFDB provides an 
opportunity for publishing information on the website.  An immediate increase in interest is 
evident especially after promotion events, which are part of the NFDB’s public awareness 
policy.  The Internet address is as follows: www. akyaka.org/otter/tr/databank_projesi.htm 
(Turkish) and www. akyaka.org/otter/eng/otter_database_project.htm (English). 
 
 
3.3  Available information 
About 20 Turkish scientists participate more or less regularly in the project, e.g., by providing 
records and other information, with six of them being very active.  
Between 2002 and 2004, we were able to compile approximately 60 otter records (our 
own records are not included in this figure) from all parts of Turkey: 5% of them belong to 
Group A, 15% to Group B and 80% to Group C.  This is a good indicator of the increase in 
public interest in this species, and for the success of the public awareness campaign.  
Participants who regularly send records are usually people who have participated in one of the 
otter-related events, and/or scientists who are working on mammals and are committed to the 
same aims as the NFDB members. 
After a promotional presentation during the Second Symposium on the Eurasian otter 
in Turkey in Antalya in October 2002, the NFDB went online. An article about the database 
in the Turkish magazine Yeşil Atlas in 2003 and another in the Turkish National Geographic 
in March 2004 helped increase interest in the otter.  Many records subsequently reached us, 
but these are mainly Group C data.  We also received several requests to publish otter papers 
on the website, and so far 30 Turkish, 18 English and three German publications are available 
there. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Development of NFDB the Otter database: The graph gives the number of new records entering the 
database per year. The records by the author (THOL-SCHMITZ & SCHMITZ, 2002) are indicated. 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
All
Author


 
 
Figure 1 shows that the annual input of new records has considerably increased since the 
establishment of NFDB which currently (September 2004) contains 195 records. The 
distribution map (Figure 2) shows a concentration of records in the Aegean Region.  This 
does not, however, indicate a greater abundance of the species there, rather simply reflects the 
activities by the author in this region. One hundred and six (55%) of all records stem from the 
author, 41 (21%) from N. Güven-Veryeri, a former associate of the NFDB, 35 (18%) from 
Turkish publications, and 12 records (6%) from various observers (see also Figure 1).  The 
quality of the records is as follows (including our own observations): 147 records (76%) 
Group A observers (experts), 35 records (18%) Group A/B observers, and 12 records (6%) 
Group C observers. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Distribution of the Eurasian otter in Turkey according to records held in the NFDB, as in September 
2004. Dots indicate localities where otters have been recorded. Only records from persons belonging to Groups 
A and B have been taken into account. As the number of sightings has not been taken into account, one dot may 
represent several records. 
 
 
The NFDB has now transferred to Doğa Derneği, a national conservation-oriented NGO, 
where the necessary infrastructure and long-term support is secured. A broader public can 
now be reached by using already existing networks with overlapping or specific interests, 
such as wetland protection or conservation of key biodiversity areas. 
 
 
3.4  Distribution 
 
NFDB covers records from all parts of the country. This confirms KUMERLOEVE (1967, 
1975) who provided the first distribution map for Turkey and stated that the otter is 
distributed throughout Turkey.  The highest density of records is found in the Aegean Region 
and in the areas of Adana (Mediterranean Region), Bursa (Marmara Region), Samsun (Black 
Sea Region) and between Kars and Trabzon (north east Turkey). The high density of records 
apparently does not reflect high species abundance, but is a matter of better assessments, and 
generally indicate those locations where NFDB members are based. The map does not include 
negative records.  
Our data did not reveal any distinct habitat preference. The Eurasian otter is found at 
lakes, rivers and creeks, in river deltas and estuaries, etc. Barrage lakes are not apparently 
inhabited. Very clean lakes and rivers in north east and eastern Turkey are inhabited 
(ZIEGLER, N. AND WEISS, M., 1999), as are greatly polluted lakes in western and north west 


 
Turkey (THOL-SCHMITZ, H. AND SCHMITZ, T., 2005). These include Lake Uluabat, Gediz 
River and the Büyük Menderes Delta. Most of the records come from habitats below 
500 metres a.s.l.; we have only five records, all from 2004, from above 1000 metres (1) 
Hanak River near  Öncülköy in north east Turkey at 1437 metres a.s.l.; (2) Kelkit River near 
Amasya in northern Turkey at 1698 metres a.s.l.; (3) Gesi River near Kayseri in Central 
Anatolia at 1396 metres a.s.l.; (4)  Soğuksu River near Beyşekir in south west Turkey at 1141 
metres a.s.l., and (5) Lake Beyşehir in south west Turkey at 1168 metres a.s.l. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
 
Figure 3.  Seasonal distribution of records of the Eurasian otter at Akyaka, Muğla Province. 
 
Records of the Eurasian otter in NFDB come from all months of the year (Figure 3).  
Observations at Akyaka in the Muğla Province, where the author has studied the species since 
1986, show no clear seasonal pattern.  Only in September-October is there an increase in the 
number of records.  There are several possible explanations for this:  
 
1. Food is more easily available, as fish that have spawned in spring have now reached 
a feasible size;  
2. Cubs born in spring are now learning to hunt;  
3. Nutrition needs are higher before winter;  
4. Tourist areas are quieter after summer.  
 
None of these issues can fully explain the increase in observations in September/October. 
Knowing this seasonal activity pattern, we usually schedule otter surveys in other areas for 
September-October, and have always been rather successful during this period.  Also the first 
winter rains usually fall in this season, making tracking easier, and this of course also leads to 
an increase of records.  
 
2.5   Conservation status 
 
The records from the database show that the Eurasian otter is not only widely distributed in 
Turkey, but is also not rare.  Despite alarming signs of decreasing numbers caused mainly by 
heavy pollution in and around more and more industrialised areas, mainly in the west and 
north west of Turkey, the species has succeeded in surviving in many areas. 
KUMERLOEVE (1967, 1975) described the species as being distributed all over 
Turkey, but seriously threatened by hunting.  He cites local sources, which say that the annual 
number of furs on the Turkish market can reach 30,000.  Although it is hard to believe that 
such a high number of otters could have been hunted even at that time, it is evident that 
hunting and culling have had a significant impact on population development.  Nowadays, the 


 
impact of hunting is not so great, but it still exists.  Table 1 lists cases of otter killing in 
Turkey.  It can be seen that significant numbers are still being killed, and this puts hunting 
among the main threats to the population. 
 
 
 
Table 1.  Mortality of the Eurasian otter in Turkey. The table gives cases of known deaths. From: THOL-
SCHMITZ, SCHMITZ and GÜVEN-VERYERI. (2002) 
 
Area  
 
Year  
No. of animals 
Reason 
 
Mersin: Mut  
1994  
 
2 
 
Culling by fishermen 
Mersin: Mut  
1995  
 
1 
 
Culling by fishermen 
Adana  
 
1988-92 
 
3 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Adana  
 
1995  
 
2 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Kayseri 
 
before 1993 
 
6 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Kayseri 
 
1993  
 
2 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Kayseri 
 
1996  
 
4 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Kayseri 
 
1997  
 
1 
 
Natural (found dead by villagers) 
Muğla: Akyaka 
before 1990 
 
2 
 
Culling by villagers 
Muğla: Akyaka 
1994-95 
 
4 
 
Culling by villagers 
Muğla: Hisarönü 
before 1990 
 
20 
 
Culling by fishermen 
Yozgat 
 
1996  
 
2 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Çorum  
 
1996  
 
1 
 
Hunting by fishermen 
Bilecik 
 
1996  
 
2 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Yozgat 
 
1998  
 
5 
 
Hunting by villagers 
Antalya: Fethiye 
2000  
 
1 
 
Hunting by fishermen 
Muğla: Dalyan 
2001  
 
1 
 
Hunting by fishermen  
 
 
 
The population of the Eurasian otter has been classified as “near threatened” (IUCN, Red 
Data Book), and the species has been given protection status by several international treaties: 
 
• 
CMS (Bonn Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild 
Animals) 
• 
Bern Convention of the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats  
• 
RAMSAR Convention on Wetlands 
• 
CITES (Washington Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Flora and Fauna) 
 
Although still widely distributed in Turkey, the otter population is declining and the species 
has been classified as “endangered” (GÜVEN, 1999; THOL-SCHMITZ, 2000, 2002, 2005; 
DEMIRSOY, 1997; KAYAÖZ, 2002).  Although otter hunting is strictly forbidden throughout the 
year and the fines are rather high (Central Commission for Hunting, annual circular), a large 
number of otters is believed to be lost through poaching as well as by direct and indirect 
persecution.  The main threat to the population is, however, the destruction of natural 
wetlands (ÖZDEMIR, 2002; UYSAL, 2002). 
 
 
 


 
4   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
I would like to thank my husband, co-field researcher and webmaster Thomas Schmitz for his 
never-ceasing support and patience in our partnership as well as in our mutual work.  
 
 
5   REFERENCES  
 
ANONYMOUS 1994. Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats: Seminar on the 
Conservation of the European Otter (Lutra lutra). Secretariat Memorandum.  Directorate of Environment and 
Local Authorities, Council of Europe, T-PVS(94) 11, Strasbourg.  
ANONYMOUS 1996. Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats: Draft 
Recommendation on the Conservation of the European Otter (Lutra lutra). Secretariat Memorandum. 
Directorate of Environment and Local Authorities, Council of Europe T-PVS (96) 54, Strasbourg.  
CHANIN, P.R.F. 1993. Otters. Whittet Books, London. 
DEMIRSOY, A. 1997. Memeliler (Mammals). Ministry of Environment, Directorate for the Protection of 
Environment, Ankara. 
EROĞLU, M. 1996. The status and habitat destruction of the otter (Lutra lutra) in the eastern Black Sea Region 
of Turkey. Environmental Encounters, No. 24: 81-84. Council of Europe, Strasbourg.  
FOSTER-TURLEY, P., S.M. MACDONALD & MASON, C.F. 1990. Otters: An Action Plan for their Conservation. 
– IUCN, gland, Switzerland. 
GÜVEN, N. 1999. Doğu Akdeniz’de Su Samuru (Lutra lutra)’nun Dağılımı [The Distribution of the Eurasian 
Otter in the eastern Black Sea Region] Bilim Uzmanlığı Tezi, Biyoloji Anabilim Dalı, Hacettepe Üniversitesi, 
Ankara. [In Turkish] 
KAYAÖZ, E. 2002. Türkiye’deki Su Samuru (Lutra lutra)’nun Korumasının Önemi ve Yaşama Alanlarını 
Saptam Çalışmaları [The importance of protecting otters in Turkey and defining study of their life territories] 
Proceedings of the Second Symposium on the Situation of the Fischotter in Turkey, Antalya, September 2002. Pp. 
31–38. TTKD, Tübitak, Ankara.  
KILIÇ, D. T. & EKEN, G.  2004. Türkiye'nin Önemli Kuş Alanları – 2004 Güncellemesi [Turkey’s Important Bird 
Areas – An Update 2004] Doğa Derneği, Ankara. [In Turkish]  
KRUUK, H., CONROY, J.W.H., GLIMMERVEEN, U. & OUKWERKERK, E. 1986. The use of spraints to survey 
populations of otters (Lutra lutra). Biological Conservation, 35: 187–194.  
KUMERLOEVE, H. 1967. Zur Verbreitung kleinasiatischer Raub- und Hufttiere sowie einiger Grossnager. 
Säugetierkundliche Mitteilungen, 15: 337-409. 
KUMERLOEVE, H. 1975. Die Säugetiere (Mammalia) der Türkei. Veröffentlichungen der zoologischen 
Staatssammlung München, 18: 69-158. 
MACDONALD, S. M. & MASON, C.F. 1983. Some factors influencing the distribution of otters (Lutra lutra). 
Mammal Review, 13: 1–10. 
MACDONALD, S.M. & MASON, C.F. 1994. Status and Conservation needs of the Otter (Lutra lutra) in the 
Western Palaearctic. Council of Europe, Strasbourg. 
ÖZDEMIR, N. 2002. Muğla Đlindeki Mevcut Alabalık Đşletmelerinde Su Samurları Konusunda Yapılan 
Bilinçlendirme ve Eğitim Çalışmaları [Awareness-raising and education about otters in trout enterprises in 
Muğla Province]. Proceedings of the Second Symposium on the Situation of the Fischotter in Turkey, Antalya, 
September 2002. Pp. 15-20. TTKD, Tübitak, Ankara.  
ÖZHATAY, N., BYFIELD, A. & ATAY, S. 2003. Türkiye’nin Önemli Bitki Alanları [Turkey’s Important Plant 
Areas]. – WWF Türkiye, DHKD, Đstanbul.  
ÖZTÜRK, B. 1998. The Turkish Marine Research Foundation. Black Sea Biological Diversity. P. 39. UNDP, 
New York. 
REUTHER, C. 1993. German Campaign for Otter Protection, IUCN Otter Specialist Bulletin, 7: 16-19 Reuther, 
C., Dolch, D., Green, R., Jahrl, J., Jefferies, D., Krekemeyer, A., Kucerova, M., Madsen, A.B., Romanowski, J., 
Roche, K., Ruiz-Olmo, J., Teubner, J. & Trindade, A. 2000 Surveying and monitoring distribution and 
population trends of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra). Habitat, 12:1-148 
STRACHAN, R. & JEFFERIES, D.J. 199O6. Otter Survey of England 1991–1994. The Vincent Wildlife Trust, 
London. 
THOL-SCHMITZ, H. 2000. Akyaka Su Samurları [The otters of Akyaka]. Nature and Man, Issue 1 (March 
2000), 24-32. TTKD,  Ankara. 


 
THOL-SCHMITZ, H. 2002. Akyaka Su Samurları II- Suzi’nin Mirası [The Otters of Akyaka II. Suzi’s Heritage]. 
Proceedings of the Second Symposium on the Situation of the Fischotter in Turkey. Antalya, September 2002. Pp. 
43-50. TTKD & Tübitak, Ankara.  
THOL-SCHMITZ, H. & SCHMITZ, T. 2005. The Situation of the Eurasian Fischotter (Lutra lutra) at Lake 
Uluabat. G.A.S.-Der/ BS 1, Akyaka. 
THOL-SCHMITZ, H. 2005. The Situation of the Eurasian Fischotter (Lutra lutra) in the Tirebolu Region. G.A.S.-
Der/ BS 2, Akyaka. 
THOL-SCHMITZ, H., SCHMITZ, T. & GÜVEN-VERYERI, N.  2002. Ulusal Data Bank - Bir Öneri [National 
Database: A proposal].  Proceedings of the Second Symposium on the Situation of the Fischotter in Turkey, 
Antalya, September 2002. Pp. 85-94. TTKD & Tübitak, Ankara.  
UYSAL, I. 2002. Balık yetiştiriciliği ve Su Samuru ilişkisi [Relationship between fish-culture and otter].  
Proceedings of the Second Symposium on the Situation of the Otter in Turkey. Antalya, September 2002. Pp. 63–
72. TTKD & Tübitak,  Ankara. 
ZIEGLER, N. & WEISS, M. 1999. Verbreitung und Gefährdung des Fischotters an der Südwestküste der Türkei 
[Distribution and threats to the Eurasian otter on the south-west coast of Turkey].  Unpublished Manuscript.  
 
 
