--- 
source: 2007 000n-56.pdf
--- 

THE DISTRIBUTION AND STATUS OF EURASIAN OTTER (LUTRA LUTRA) IN RUSSIA 
 
Valery M. NERONOV 
 
The A. N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Russian Academy of Sciences, 13 Fersman Street, Moscow, 
119312 Russia   email: mab.ru@relcom.ru 
 
 
In the territory of the former Soviet Union the Eurasian otter is represented by three subspecies: 
Northern (L. l. lutra L.), Caucasian (L. l. meridionalis Ognev) and Middle Asian (L. l. seistanica 
Birula). The last two have been included into the Red Data Book of USSR (1978); the Middle 
Asian subspecies – into Red Data Books of Turkmenistan (1985) and Kazakhstan (1996) and the 
Caucasian one – into the Red Data Book of the Russian Federation (2001). The whole species was 
included into CITES, Appendix I (1977) and also into the EC Trade Regulations Appendix A 
(1996).  
The range of the northern subspecies, covers almost the whole territory of the Russian 
Federation: from the Kola Peninsula to the Kamchatka Peninsula and at the south of the European 
territory, including a valley and delta of the Volga River. Due to harsh environmental conditions, it 
avoids the northern part of Siberia: from the Yamal Peninsula to the Chukotka Peninsula. V. 
Heptner et al. (1967) presented a comprehensive review of the distribution, ecology, behavior, 
numbers and practical use of otters, and later on, additional data was given, by M. Vaisfeld, (1977) 
in a monograph on the commercial hunting species of USSR. In recent years, any more detailed 
studies devoted to the otter, have not been published. In February 2003, in Moscow, there the 
International conference on mammal fauna of Russia and adjacent territories, was held, but amongst 
more than 300 papers, only two described the ecology of the otter. According to the above 
publications, it is possible to say that the Eurasian otter could inhabit the wide spectrum of 
landscapes, but its distribution, due to the nutrition features, has intrazonal character. In suitable 
habitats, it is a common, but not very numerous animal, (approximately 3,5 otters per 10 km of 
river). In the Russian Federation, according to official statistics, the maximum harvest of otter skins, 
was about 7000 in 1964, and after that in the ‘70’s, it went down. The current status of otter 
commercial harvesting is unknown, because many skins were sold on the “black market”. Due to 
the increased anthropogenic impacts, relevant conservation measures should be applied to different 
otter populations and it is also desirable to prepare the National strategy, for the conservation of the 
Eurasian otter in Russia.  
 
The Russian MAB Committee, has made an inventory of studies of mammal species in 
Russian Biosphere Reserves and in most of them, there is data on the Eurasian otter. Even some 
accidental appearance of the otter has been recorded in the Taimyrsky BR, situated to the north, 
from the known limit of its geographical range. Russia has implemented some recommendations of 
the Pan-European Biological and Landscape Diversity Strategy, and more should be done for 
implementing its Theme 11 “Action for Threatened Species”, which was supported by the 
SSC/IUCN. The Eurasian otter is a very valuable species and international cooperation for its 
survival should be strengthening. 
 
