--- 
source: 2007-20.pdf
--- 

Reproductive Effects of Intraperitoneal Transmitter Implants in River Otters
Donald G. Reid; Wayne E. Melquist; James D. Woolington; John M. Noll
The Journal of Wildlife Management, Vol. 50, No. 1. (Jan., 1986), pp. 92-94.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-541X%28198601%2950%3A1%3C92%3AREOITI%3E2.0.CO%3B2-%23
The Journal of Wildlife Management is currently published by Alliance Communications Group.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/acg.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Thu Jul 19 03:44:29 2007


REPRODUCTIVE EFFECTS OF INTRAPERITONEAL TRANSMITTER 
IMPLANTS IN RIVER OTTERS 
DONALD G. REID, Department of Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada 
WAYNE E. MELQUIST,' Idaho Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83843 
JAMES D. WOOLINGTON, Alaska Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99708 
JOHN M. NOLL, Alaska Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99708 
Abstract: Data on 7 instrumented adult female river otters (Lutra canadensis) from 3 study areas in 
western North America were used to evaluate the effects of intraperitoneal radio transmitter implants on 
reproductive performance. Based on our observations, all stages of the breeding cycle can proceed success- 
fully with a radio package implanted in the abdominal cavity. 
The use of radio transmitters designed for 
intraperitoneal implantation is a relatively re-
cent advancement in wildlife biotelemetry 
(Smith and Whitney 1977). In many cases, im- 
planted radio packages are more desirable than 
collars or harnesses when studying animals with 
streamlined body form or with aquatic or fos- 
sorial habits (Melquist and Hornocker 1979b). 
Researchers often have failed to address the 
potential effects that intraperitoneal radio 
transmitters have on the study animals. Repro- 
ductive performance is 1 critical process that 
might be affected, and the objective of our study 
was to evaluate the reproductive success of in- 
strumented female river otters. The reproduc- 
tive cycle in female river otters includes spring 
breeding, immediate development of the egg(s) 
to blastocysts, a delay of implantation for 9-10 
months, and intrauterine implantation with a 
61-63 day development of the embryo-fetus to 
term (Liers 1951, Hamilton and Eadie 1964, 
Tabor and Wight 1977, Mowbray et al. 1979, 
Hill and Lauhachinda 1980). 
The research in Alberta was funded by the 
Alberta Fish and Wildl. Div.; the Can. Wildl. 
Serv.; the Boreal Inst. North. Stud.; the Alberta 
Recr., Parks and Wildl. Found.; and the Arctic 
Inst. North Am. P. deNooij and M. Schoonder- 
woerd performed the surgery, and T. E. Code 
and J. Etzkorn provided field assistance. The 
research in Idaho was conducted from the Ida- 
ho Coop. Wildl. Res. Unit, Univ. Idaho. Major 
funding was provided by the U.S. Fish and 
Wildl. Serv. The Idaho Dep. Fish and Game 
and the Univ. Idaho provided additional finan- 
cial support. The YACC program of the U.S. 
' Present address: Idaho Department of Fish and 
J. WILDL. MANAGE. 50(1):92-94 
Fish and Wildl. Serv. provided employees, op- 
erating funds, and equipment. C. M. Mack and 
R. R. Whitman assisted in the field during this 
phase of the research. The research in Alaska 
was funded by the Alaska Dep. Fish and Game, 
the Alaska Coop. Wildl. Res. Unit, the Alaska 
Logger's Assoc., the U.S. Fish and Wildl. Serv., 
and the U.S. For. Serv. R. B. Bauder performed 
the surgery. Field assistance was provided by 
K. T. Bovee, S. G. Buck, J. S. Hawkings, and 
N. M. Grimmond. 
METHODS 
Melquist and Hornocker (1979~) developed 
the surgical technique and 1st used intraperi- 
toneal implants to study river otters in west- 
central Idaho. Subsequent and ongoing studies 
of river otters in Alberta (Reid 1984) and Alas- 
ka (Larsen 1983; Woolington 1984; J. M. Noll, 
unpubl. data) have made use of the technique 
on a variety of age and sex classes. The trans- 
mitters (Telonics Inc., Mesa, Ariz.; Wildl. Ma- 
terials Inc., Carbondale, Ill.) were cylindrical 
(9.5 x 3.3 cm) and weighed from 80 to 100 g. 
They were encapsulated in a physiologically in- 
ert material. 
We equipped 7 adult female river otters with 
intraperitoneal radio implants in 3 study areas 
in western North America. Surgery, using ke- 
tamine hydrochloride as the anesthetic, usually 
was performed at some time during pregnancy, 
a period that lasts nearly 12 months. Four op- 
erations were performed in autumn, during the 
period of delayed implantation; 3 were per-
formed in spring, during fetal development and 
very late pregnancy; and 1was performed dur- 
ing lactation (Table 1). 
We inferred a successful breeding cycle when 
Game, 600 S. Walnut, P.O. Box 25, Boise, ID 83707. 
juvenile otter(s) were observed traveling and 
12 


J. Wildl. Manage. 50(1):1986 
OTTERRADIOIMPLANTSReid et al. 
93 
Table 1. Observed reproductive performance of adult female river otters with intraperitoneal radio implants, western North 
America, 1979-83. 
Reproductive performance 
Parturition 
Time since 
Study 
Date of 
Copulatory 
surgery 
area 
N 
surgery 
behavior 
Estimated date 
(weeks) 
Postpartum 
Subsequent behavior 
Idaho 
1 
4 Nov 
Observed 
Early Apr 
21 
Weaned 3 pups 
(west-
1979 
24 Apr 
1980 
1980 
central) 
(1st) 
1988 
2 May 
Early Apr 
49 
Weaned 1pup 
1980 
1981 
1981 
(2nd) 
Alberta 
2 
16 Sept 
Late Apr 
26 
Weaned 2 pups 
No natal be-
(north-
1980 
1981 
1981 
havior 1982 
eastern) 
18 Oct 
No natal behav-
1981 
ior 1982 
Alaska 
4 
30 Mar 
Spring 
1 6  
Weaned pups 
Uncertain 
(south-
1982 
1982 
1983 
eastern) 
2 Apr 
Spring 
<6 
Uncertain 
Uncertain 
1982 
1982 
1982 
1983 
27 Apr 
Spring 
<2 
Weaned pups 
1982 
1982 
1982 
Spring 
approx. 
Weaned pups 
1983 
54 
1983 
9 Aug 
Spring 
approx. 
Weaned pups 
1982 
1983 
36 
1983 
a Melquist and Hornocker 1983 
interacting with the radio-marked adult fe-
male but with no other adults present. Because 
the number of observations of each radio-
marked animal varied greatly between individ-
uals and between studies, the data reported may 
be incomplete. Observations of unmarked fe-
males, with or without juveniles, were infre-
quent. Consequently, information on the pro-
portion of adult females breeding annually in 
each study population was unavailable. There-
fore, we could not determine how the observed 
number of successful pregnancies compared to 
the expected number. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Seven adult females instrumented with func-
tional transmitters passed through a total of 12 
possible pregnancies (Table 1).Six of these fe-
males successfully gave birth, 4 with 1litter and 
2 with 2 litters. All 6 would have bred prior to 
the initial implantation of the radio packages 
and passed through the latter stages of preg-
nancy with the implanted radios. Two subse-
quently completed another successful repro-
ductive cycle with the radios already implanted. 
One of these was observed copulating. 
Our ability to report litter size is compro-
mised by the difficulties of observing otters and 
by observations of radio-marked females and 
unmarked pups in social groups with possibly 
> 1  adult female. In 2 instances (Alberta and 
Idaho) we are sure that litters from radio-
marked females were of average size. 
The Idaho female successfully weaned a lit-
ter of 3 pups that she whelped only weeks be-
fore her 2nd surgery, performed on 2 May 1980 
while she was lactating (Melquist and Hornock-
er 1983). On 19 April 1981 she was observed 
with only 1pup from her subsequent pregnan-
cy. The stresses of capture and surgery, when 
combined with the recent stress of parturition 
(late Mar-early Apr 1980)and concurrent stress 
of lactation, may have affected the develop-
ment of new blastocysts conceived by breeding 
in late April 1980. 
Neither female in Alberta exhibited natal 
denning behavior in spring 1982. Although ra-
dio implantation may have had an effect, other 
explanations include unsuccessful breeding in 


94 
OTTERRADIOIMPLANTSReid et al. 
J. Wildl. Manage. 50(1):1986 
spring 1981 or neonatal mortality. We are un-
certain whether 3 of the 7 possible pregnancies 
in Alaska resulted in successful births. In 1 of 
these cases the female exhibited natal denning 
behavior, but young were not observed. In the 
2 other cases juveniles were observed in the 
home ranges of the adult females but were not 
necessarily the offspring of that instrumented 
female. 
CONCLUSIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Based on our observations of transmitter-im-
planted otters, all stages of the breeding cycle 
(including copulation, embryonic and fetal de-
velopment, and lactation) can proceed success-
fully with a radio package in the abdominal 
cavity. Surgery to implant the radio transmitter 
should be timed to avoid periods when stress 
from capture or anesthesia may be greatest. Ke-
tamine hydrochloride is not known to induce 
abortion, but it does cross the placenta and pro-
duce anesthetic effects in the fetuses (Fowler 
1978). This or any other drug may affect fetal 
development and subsequent survival of the 
offspring. We do not recommend live capture 
and surgery on adult females during late stages 
of pregnancy and lactation. 
LITERATURE CITED 
FOWLER,M. E. 1978. Restraint and handling of 
wild and domestic animals. Iowa State Univ. 
Press, Ames. 332pp. 
HAMILTON,
W. J., AND W. R. EADIE. 1964. Repro-
duction in the otter, Lutra canadenski. J. Mam-
mal. 45:242-252. 
HILL,E. P., AND V. LAUHACHINDA.
1980. Repro-
duction in river otters from Alabama and Geor-
gia. Pages 478-486 in J. A. Chapman and D. 
Pursley, eds. Proc. worldwide furbearer confer-
ence. Worldwide Furbearer Conf., Inc., Frost-
burg, Md. 
LARSEN,D. N. 
1983. Habitats, movements and 
foods of river otters in coastal southeastern Alas-
ka. M.S. Thesis, Univ. Alaska, Fairbanks. 149pp. 
LIERS,E. E. 1951. Notes on the river otter (Lutra 
canadensis).J. Mammal. 32:l-9. 
MELQUIST,W. E., AND M. G. HORNOCKER.1979a. 
Development and use of a telemetry technique 
for studying river otter. Proc. Int. Conf. Wildl. 
Biotelem. 2:104-114. 
, AND -. 1979b. Methods and tech-
niques for studying and censusing river otter 
populations. Univ. Idaho For., Wildl. and Range 
Exp. Stn. Tech. Rep. 8. 17pp. 
, AND -. 1983. Ecology of river otters 
in west central Idaho. Wildl. Monogr. 83. 60pp. 
MOWBRAY,
E. E., D. PURSLEY,
AND J. A. CHAPMAN. 
1979. The status, population characteristics and 
harvest of the river otter in Maryland. Md. Wildl. 
Adm. Publ. Wildl. Ecol. 2. 16pp. 
REID,D. G. 1984. Ecological interactions of river 
otters and beavers in a boreal ecosystem. M.S. 
Thesis, Univ. Calgary, Calgary, Alberta. 210pp. 
SMITH,H. R., AND G. D. WHITNEY.1977. Intra-
peritoneal transmitter implants-their biological 
feasibility for studying small mammals. Proc. Int. 
Conf. Wildl. Biotelem. 1:109-117. 
TABOR,J. E., AND H.M. WIGHT. 1977. Population 
status of river otter in western Oregon. J. Wildl. 
Manage. 41692-699. 
WOOLINGTON,
J. D. 1984. Habitat use and move-
ments of river otters at Kelp Bay, Baranof Is-
land, Alaska. M.S. Thesis, Univ. Alaska, Fair-
banks. 147pp. 
Received 12 September 1984. 
Accepted 18 April 1985. 
