--- 
source: 2007 000n-40.pdf
--- 

 
1
CARING FOR WILD OTTERS 
 
Grace M YOXON 
 
International Otter Survival Fund, Black Park, Broadford, Isle of Skye, IV49 9DE, Scotland, UK 
email:  Grace@otter.org  
 
Abstract.  This paper looks at the care of otters taken  into rescue and rehabilitation centres.  It stresses the need for 
keeping human contact to a minimum in order to prevent imprinting.  The method used to rear “orphaned” cubs is 
described as well as the problems facing juveniles and adults.  This is rehabilitation and therefore not a veterinary 
paper and so details of medication, etc are not included. 
 
Keywords:  Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, rehabilitation, imprinting, orphan. 
 
  
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
The title of this paper is "Caring for Wild Otters" as it relates not simply to otter rescue, but 
about otter rescue and rehabilitation.  This means that, at the end of the caring process, it must be 
possible to release the otter back to the wild.  If an animal is imprinted and/or tame it cannot be 
released. 
 
To do this with any species it is necessary to know as much as possible about the animal 
in the wild - its food, behaviour, any territoriality, nesting/den requirements, and basic ecology.  
In order to understand the animal in the wild it is necessary to undertake extensive field research 
as well as reading relevant publications (CHANIN, 1985; MASON AND MACDONALD, 1986; 
KRUUK, 1995;). 
 
There is not a lot of literature on actual rehabilitation of otters, especially the Eurasian 
otter (Lutra lutra).  Various papers cover the American river otter (Lontra canadensis) and these 
can be used for reference, for example, DUPLAIX-HALL (1972), CAIN-STAGE (1990) and REED-
SMITH (1995).  There are also various papers on oiled otters, especially in connection with the 
Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska, but this is not a topic covered in this paper. 
 
 
2   CASUALTIES  
 
Casualties can be broadly divided into three groups:  cubs, juveniles and adults. Each has different 
needs so it is necessary to consider them separately.  As in other rehabilitation, we should 
remember that we are not vets and must therefore depend on their expertise.  At the International 
Otter Survival Fund (IOSF), a vet is consulted whenever an otter comes into our care, as 
otherwise something important may be overlooked.   
 
2.1. Cubs 
As cubs are born at more or less any time of year they can appear in a rehabilitation centre 
during any month.  Therefore, unlike in most rehabilitation work there is no real "Cub Season".  
However, in Scotland there do appear to be peaks of breeding, with slightly fewer births in 
summer.  Also if a female breeds in summer, conditions are better and she is more able to care 
for them herself.  As a result, fewer cubs generally come into rehabilitation during this season.  
Most cubs arrive at around 10-12 weeks of age, the time they first venture out of the holt. 
Usually we do not know how they have been "orphaned":  the female may have been killed on 
the road, drowned in a fishing creel, or by other means.  As with other animals, the female may 
simply have abandoned the cub deliberately as she knows it cannot survive; or there may have 


 
2
been the usual “well-meaning” pick-up problems (i.e. people find a cub and assume that it has 
been abandoned). 
When they arrive at the centre, they are usually cold, wet and dehydrated, and it is 
therefore vital to give the usual first aid treatment of warmth and liquids.  Individuals are 
weighed and checked for any signs of injury or illness.   
 
The IOSF cub-rearing programme has three parts:  indoors, nursery pens and croft pens.  
All new cubs are kept first indoors.  If it is very young it will need milk substitute and, as otters 
cannot tolerate lactose, Pet-Ag milk 30/55 formula or Multimilk is used (PET-AG INC., 1993).  
Usually they will take to a bottle easily.  However, GREEN (1991) states that there may be 
problems with bottle-fed cubs getting milk into their lungs when suckling and she recommends 
the use of a syringe.   
Individuals a little older may start feeding on fish fillet.  They will not eat oily fish, such 
as herring and mackerel, so white fish, such as hake and whiting, is used.  The fish may need to 
be pureed when the cubs are weaning and for some it will be necessary to start with a fish 
puree/milk mixture before they begin to feed on fish alone.  After the fillet they will progress to 
small whole white fish.   
When deciding on the solid diet for the cubs it is important to consider what they would 
be eating in the wild.  Various diets for use with otters have been put forward:  some people use 
day old chicks, but birds make up a very small proportion of the diet in the wild [less than 2%] 
(YOXON, 1999) and therefore fish is the better option.  It is also necessary to remember the 
importance of vitamins, particularly if using frozen fish, as the freezing process removes much 
of the vitamin content.  Mazuri Fish Eater Vitamin tablets are used as recommended by GREEN 
(1991). 
It is always better to rear two cubs together, to prevent any possibility of imprinting on 
humans.   They will not only provide company for each other but will develop normal sibling 
rivalry and otter behaviour, and will cuddle together to give each other natural warmth.  Two 
cubs will teach each other, for example if one is reluctant to swim it will often be encouraged 
into the water by the other.  If individuals of a similar age are in the centre they will be put 
together, even if unrelated. There is, however, always a period of quarantine to make sure there 
is no possibility of the transfer of any illness. 
To begin with cubs are indoors and kept warm with heat lamps.  At this time they do not 
need a pool, only a bowl of drinking water.  Bedding is provided in the form of old blankets or 
towels but it is important to check this regularly because cubs will often tip the water bowl over 
and soak the bedding. 
We gradually introduce the young animals to outside nursery pens where they can be 
monitored regularly.  Here the cubs have access to a byre (barn), which can be heated.  These 
nursery pens also have pools which can be covered ensuring that the cubs cannot enter them 
unsupervised.  Initially they are put outside for only a short period each day, and this is slowly 
increased, but the animals are still brought in at night.  When first left out all day the cubs can 
still be locked in the byre at night for warmth.  The age at which this process takes place depends 
to some extent on the weather, for example, during the summer it is possible to get them out 
quicker than in the winter. 
The third stage is when they are transferred to the croft pens.  These are basically 25 
metre square areas of natural moorland, which have been fenced off.  Each pen has a natural 
pool with a flow of water fed from a local burn (stream).  In this way the cubs have as close to 
their natural habitat as possible. 
When designing a pen it is important to bear in mind what the animal is likely to do to 
try and escape – it will not only dig but also climb!  Therefore fences need to be approximately 
two metres high with an overhang and buried to a depth of about half a metre.  The perimeter 
fencing of the pen must also be checked regularly to counter any digging. 


 
3
Cubs need to be released at the normal age of dispersal; as they normally stay with their 
mother for about 13-14 months they are therefore released at this age, although there are some 
records of them dispersing at 8-16 months (WATT, 1991; DE SILVA, 1991).  If, however, this 
coincides with the midwinter they will be kept until the following spring.  This is why it is so 
important to keep human contact to minimum, and normally only two people are responsible for 
all feeding, cleaning and checking the pen.   
Choosing the release site must be done with care.  It is generally accepted policy now 
that cubs must be released in the same geographical area in which they were found unless there 
are problems associated with this. 
A soft release is generally used.  Firstly, the release box is placed into the pen beforehand 
so the otters can become used to it, and sometimes they may even use it.  At the release site, a 
temporary pen is put up and the otter is left there to become accustomed to the new location.  
Once the otter is allowed out into the wild, food is left daily for a while to supplement the early 
hunting if necessary and local people can be used to maintain this food supply.   
 
2.2  Juveniles  
It is not uncommon to receive a call about an otter which is acting strangely, in that it is hanging 
around houses, etc.  If an adult otter is injured in any way it will often seek somewhere quiet, 
like a shed, where it can rest up.  If the animal appears uninjured, however, the chances are that 
it is a juvenile.   
As has been said, cubs normally stay with the female until they are about 13-14 months.  
If they have become separated from their mother early for any reason, and the cub is still young, 
it may be old enough to catch food for itself, but  not old enough to cope on its own.  We do not 
know how they have become separated, but it is a fact that over the years we have received three 
times as many female as male juveniles.  This could be because the female is more linked to the 
home range and males will continue to wander. 
When juveniles hit a problem they may start to venture into areas of human habitation – 
otters have been found wandering into playgroups, filling stations, through cat flaps into houses 
and approaching people apparently wanting food.  The animal sometimes appears to be 
imprinted but if it is taken into care and fed and ignored it will revert to normal behaviour.  In 
these cases all that is necessary is for it to be kept until its normal dispersal age, keeping human 
contact to a minimum, and then released into the area where it was found. 
One problem with these animals is that they are desperate to escape and are far worse to 
keep than any others.  Young cubs are in need of care and accept the level of captivity that is 
necessary until they are ready to go and then they too will start to look for ways to escape.  
Adults only come in if injured and again keeping them is not a problem.  But juveniles are not 
injured and they want freedom and they will squeeze through the smallest gap, they will climb 
anything and they will definitely find the smallest flaw in a pen!  We use the nursery pens, which 
have a concrete floor so they cannot dig and they are fully roofed so they cannot climb out.  They 
are obviously smaller than the croft pens but are adequate for the short time they will be kept. 
 
Both juveniles and adults have to be treated with care when being caught.  Sometimes it 
is possible to trap them using a large cat trap with a spring door.  However, otters do learn 
quickly and if they spring the trap, but manage to escape it is unlikely that they will go in the trap 
again. 
 
A grasper is used to restrain the animal but the loop of the grasper must be positioned 
behind the front legs, as it will slip off if only placed around the neck.  It is also better for the 
animal to be held in this way rather than around the neck. 
 
2.3.  Adults 
Any adult which comes in obviously has a serious problem so it must be assessed by a vet and 


 
4
although the younger animals may appear healthy they should still be examined to ensure 
nothing has been missed.  As we are not vets any medication must be given under vet 
supervision.  The BSAVA Manual of Wildlife Casualties (MULLINEAUX, BEST AND COOPER, 
2003) lists suitable medication.  Further information on medication is found in GREEN (2002).  If 
your vet is not familiar with otters they should be put in direct contact with an experienced otter 
vet, rather than the rehabilitator acting as a “middleman”. 
 
An important aspect of the vet’s examination is the use of anaesthetics.  Otters must 
always be actively brought out of the anaesthetic rather than simply allowing them to ‘come 
round’.  If not, they often do not recover consciousness.  The vet should also be aware that after 
the antidote has been given they will come round almost instantly so they should be placed into 
the recovery cage before this is given.  
 
Adult otters may be brought into a rehabilitation centre for a variety of reasons (Table 1). 
 [The figures do not add up to 100% as some animals have more than one problem.]  Clearly 
road traffic accidents cause the biggest problem, followed by bites caused by intraspecific 
fighting.   
 
Table 1:  Causes of admission to IOSF rehabilitation centre 
 
 
Cause of admission 
% 
Road traffic accidents 
32 
Bites 
14 
Pedal lesions 
9 
Hydrocephalus/Encephalitis/ 
Meningitis 
 
8 
Spinal damage 
7 
Rope/net 
5 
‘Trapped’ 
5 
Eye problems 
5 
Boat injuries 
4 
Dental problems 
4 
Old age 
4 
Parasites (Tapeworms)* 
2 
Dog attack 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Although not actually a cause for admission, two otters were found to carry a high parasite load with 
tapeworms.  Many otters which are in a poor condition will also have ticks. 
 
Road casualties occur least in the summer, largely because of the long daylight hours or 
because the water level is lower and so the otter may be more willing to go under a bridge 
rather than having to cross the road.  Frequently such casualties have spinal injuries and this 
may mean the animal has to be euthanased.  Sometimes the injuries may not be severe and 
they can recover very quickly.  One particular example had radial paralysis and within three 
weeks she was ready for release.   
 
Bite wounds seem to be increasing and these can often be extremely serious (SIMPSON, 
2005).  The wounds are often on the face but also on the genital area, although in Spain animals 
have been found with wounds on the legs, foot-webs and neck (J. RUIZ-OLMO, Personal 
communication).  Sometimes an animal may appear to have no obvious wounds as they are 
hidden in the thick fur and this reinforces the need for a good veterinary examination to ensure 
that such wounds are not missed.  It also stresses the need for post mortems as again this can 
reveal an underlying problem which had been overlooked. 


 
5
When releasing adults they clearly have to go back to the same place (within reason!) as 
they will already have an established home range. 
 
 
3   POST RELEASE MONITORING 
 
Post-release monitoring is important and we have used different methods. Coastal otters tend to 
be diurnal.  In this situation, visual identification can be used, for example, the end of the tail can 
be coloured orange using non-toxic sheep marking dye; this can be seen when they dive.  Radio-
tracking has also been used, but there can be problems with attaching the transmitter as collars 
cannot be worn for long periods of time.  Super-glue was used to stick the transmitter on to the 
underfur at the back of the neck and this did stay on long enough to prove that the animal was 
surviving in the wild.  Eventually the transmitter fell off with no harm to the individual.  Internal 
transmitters have also been used, but there have been records of problems with their use. 
 
 
4   POST MORTEMS 
 
The importance of post mortem examination has already been mentioned with regard to 
discovering underlying problems such as hidden bite wounds. 
It is appropriate here to consider two special cases in which the cubs looked perfectly 
normal, but their behaviour was distinctly odd.  This further stresses the importance of knowing 
as much as possible about the natural behaviour of the animal in the wild, otherwise it may not 
be possible to identify “odd” behaviour.  These two cubs had good fur quality and were quite fat 
but upon observation were found to have poor eyesight and one also had very poor hearing.  
They also had poor co-ordination, and one was in such a bad condition that she went round in 
circles.  Clearly there was some neurological problem.  In addition although both cubs were 
feeding well they never put on any weight and continued to look like a perfectly normal tiny cub 
right to the end. 
Unfortunately both cubs died and upon post mortem they were found to have 
hydrocephalus.  This condition has also been described in other cubs in Scotland (GREEN and 
GREEN, 2002).  JACQUES (2004) in her paper on Central Neurological Problems also refers to 
this condition.  Therefore, whenever a cub is received it should be monitored carefully for any 
signs of neurological problems.  
Furthermore if an animal dies a post mortem examination is vital as much knowledge 
can be lost if this is not done.  For instance, neurological problems can be associated with a lack 
of Vitamin A, and this in turn can be linked to pollution, so the identification of such problems 
can give far more information than just how the animal died. 
 
 
5   CONCLUSIONS 
 
The aim of any rehabilitation must always be to release a wild animal.  Any animal which is 
imprinted is immediately “disabled” albeit not physically but mentally.  Even in our relatively 
large pens the otters are frustrated and want to escape.  If we are in rehabilitation we must be 
able to release our animals and this means releasing a WILD animal.  We must know that our 
otters are going to survive naturally in the wild and not be at risk from people or pose a threat to 
them. 
 


 
6
6   REFERENCES 
 
CAIN-STAGE, M. 1990. Rehabilitation notes:  American river otter (Lutra canadensis). Wildlife Journal, 13: No 
1, 7-10. 
CHANIN, P.R.F. 1985. The Natural History of Otters. Croom Helm, London. 
DE SILVA, P.K. 1991. Aspects of behaviour and ecology of Old World otters. In: Proceedings of the Fifth 
International Otter Colloquium, Hankensbüttel 1989. (Edited by Reuther, C. & Röchert, R.) Habitat, 6:  95-106. 
DUPLAIX-HALL, N. 1972. Notes on maintaining river otters in captivity.  International Zoo Year Book, 12: 178-
180.  
GREEN, R.E. 1991. Otters:  A case study in rehabilitation. Wild Aid Guide to Scotland.  Skye Environmental 
Centre Ltd., Isle of Skye. 
GREEN, R.E. 2002. Treatment, medication and administration of drugs to otters. In: Otter Conservation – an 
Example for a Sustainable Use of Wetlands. Proceedings of the Seventh International Otter Colloquium, Trebon, 
14-19 March 1998. (Edited by Dulfer, R., Conroy, J.W.H., Nel, A.J. & Gutleb, A.C.) IUCN Otter Specialist 
Group Bulletin, 19A:  92-95. 
GREEN, R.E AND GREEN, J.  2002. Disease and health problems in British otters (Lutra lutra) at a rehabilitation 
centre. In: Otter Conservation – an Example for a Sustainable Use of Wetlands. Proceedings of the Seventh 
International Otter Colloquium, Trebon, 14-19 March 1998. (Edited by Dulfer, R., Conroy, J.W.H., Nel, A.J. & 
Gutleb, A.C.) IUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin, 19A: 84-91.  
JACQUES, H. 2004. Central neurological problems: a few cases. In: The Return of the Otter in Europe – Where and 
How?  Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye, July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-
Olmo, J.) Pp. xx-xx. International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of Skye. 
KRUUK, H. 1995.  Wild Otters – Predation and Populations.  Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
MASON, C.F. AND MACDONALD, S.M.  1986.  Otters – Ecology and Conservation.  Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
MULLINEAUX, E., BEST, D. AND COOPER, J.E. [Editors] 2003. BSAVA Manual of Wildlife Casualties.  British 
Small Animal Veterinary Association. 
PET-AG INC. 1993.  Zoologic Nutritional Components. Milk Matrix Formulation and Mixing Guide. Pet-Ag Inc. 
Hampshire, USA. 
REED-SMITH, J. 1995. Husbandry Notebook of the North American River Otter (Lontra canadensis). John Ball 
Zoological Garden, Grand Rapids, Michigan. 
SIMPSON, V. 2005 Bite wounds, dental lesions and sepsis – the silent killers. In: The Return of the Otter in 
Europe – Where and How? Sabhal Mor Ostaig, Isle of Skye, 30 June – 5 July 2003. (Edited by Conroy, J.W.H., 
Yoxon, G., Gutleb, A.C. & Ruiz-Olmo , J.) Pp.  xx-xx. International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Isle of 
Skye. 
WATT, J.P. 1991.  Prey Selection by Coastal Otters (Lutra lutra).  PhD thesis, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen. 
YOXON, P.  1999. The Effect of Geology on the Distribution of the Eurasian Otter (Lutra lutra) on the Isle of Skye. 
PhD.  Thesis, Open University, Milton Keynes. 
 
 
  
