--- 
source: 2007-16.pdf
--- 

Biological Services Program
FWS/OBS-821 10
FEBRU AR Y 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS
Fish and Wildlife Service
u.s. Department of the Interior


The Biological Services Program was established within the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service to supply scientific information and methodologies on
key environmental issues that impact fish and wildlife resources and their
supporting ecosystems.
Th. mission of the program is as
follo~lS:
•
To strengthen the Fish and Wildlife Service in its role as
a primary source of information on national fish and wild-
life resources, particularly in respect to environmental
impact assessment.
•
To gather, analyze, and present information that will aid
decisionmakers in the identification and resolution of
problems associated with major changes in land and water
use.
•
To provide better ecological information and evaluation
for Department of the Interior development programs, such
as those relating to energy development.
Information developed by the Biological Services Program is intended
for use in the planning and decisionmaking process to prevent or minimize
the impact of development on fish and wildlife.
Research activities and
technical assistance services are based on an analysis of the issues, a
determination of the decisionmakers involved and their information needs,
and an evaluation of the state of the art to identify information gaps
and to determine priorities.
This is a strategy that will ensure that
the products produced and disseminated are timely and useful.
Projects have been initiated in the following areas:
coal extraction
and conversion; power plants; geothermal, mineral and oil shale develop-
ment; water resource analysis, including stream alterations and western
water allocation; coastal ecosystems and Outer Continental Shelf develop-
ment; and systems inventory, including National Wetland Inventory.
habitat classification and analysis, and information transfer.
The Biological Services Program consists of the Office of Biological
Services in Washington, D.C., which is responsible for overall planning and
management; National Teams, which provide the Program's central scientific
and technical expertise and arrange for contracting biological services
studies with states, universities. consulting firms, and others; Regional
Staffs. who provide a link to problems at the operating leve1;and staffs at
certain Fish and Wildlife Service research facilities, who conduct in-house
research studieS.


HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS: INTRODUCTION
by
Melvin Schamberger
Adri an H.
Farmer
and
James W. Terrell
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, Colorado
80526
Office of Biological Services
and
Division of Ecological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington, D.C.
20240
FWS/OBS-82/10
February 1982


This report should be cited as:
Schamberger, M., A.
H.
Farmer, and J.
W. Terrell.
1982.
Habitat suitability
index models:introduction.
U.S.D.l.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-82/10.
2 pp.
i i


INTRODUCTION TO THE HABITAT SUITABllITY INDEX MODEL SERIES
This series provides habitat information for evaluating
impacts on fish
and wildlife habitat resulting from water or
land use changes.
The impetus
for this series was the Habitat Evaluation Procedures (U.S.
Fish and Wildlife
Service 1980a), a planning and evaluation technique that focuses on the habitat
requirements of fish and wildlife species.
The habitat information
in this
series has been formatted according to Standards for the Development of Habitat
Suitability Index Models (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1981).
This
series
may
appear
similar to
other
sources
of
information that
address,
in
general
terms,
the
habitat
requirements
of
fish
and wildlife
species.
Several other efforts to compile species data bases have been init-
iated in recent years (e.g., Mason et al.
1979; U.S. Fish and Wildl ife Service
198Gb).
Whereas these other data bases are descriptive in content and contain
an array of habitat and population information, this series is unique in that
it is constrained to habitat information only, with an emphasis on quantitative
relationships between key environmental variables and habitat suitability.
In
addition, this series synthesizes habitat information into explicit habitat
models useful in quantitative assessments.
The models
in this series reference numerous literature sources
in an
effort to consolidate scientific information on species-habitat relationships.
Models are included that provide a numerical
index of habitat suitability on a
0.0 to 1.0 scale, based on the assumption that there is a positive relationship
between the index and habitat carrying capacity (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1981).
The models vary in generality and precision, due in part to the amount
of available
quantitative
habitat
information and the frequent qualitative
nature of existing information.
When possible, models are included that are
derived from site-specific population and habitat data.
The HSI models are usually presented in three basic formats:
(1) graphic;
(2) word; and (3) mathematical.
The graphic format is a representation of the
structure of the model
and displays the sequential
aggregation of variables
into an HSI.
Following this,
the model
relationships are discussed and the
assumed
relationships
between
variables,
components,
and HSI's
documented.
This discussion of model relationships provides a working version of the model
and
is,
in
effect,
a word model.
Finally,
the
model
relationships
are
described
in mathematical
language,
mimicking as
closely
and
as
simply
as
possible, the preceding word descriptions.
The models are documented for several reasons.
First, the documentation
explains the model
I s structure and inherent assumptions.
Second,
the model
building
process involves considerable judgement,
and documentation provides
the insights necessary to modify the model when these judgements are inconsis-
tent with
local
or new knowledge.
Finally, documentation should facilitate
reformulation of the model to meet individual
study constraints.
Graphic or
word model
formats
may be used to support reconnaissance level
assessments,
although repeatability may be reduced when using these model forms.
The models should be viewed as hypotheses of species-habitat relationships
rather than statements of proven cause and effect relationships.
Their value


is to serve as a basis for improved decisionmaking and increased understanding
of habitat relationships because they specify hypotheses of habitat relation-
ships that can be tested and improved.
Results of model
performance tests,
when available, are presented or referenced with each model.
However, models
that have been reliable in
specific studies may be less reliable in
other
situations.
For this reason,
feedback is encouraged from model users concern-
ing improvements to models, the availability of other habitat models, results
of model tests, and suggestions that may increase the effective use of habitat
information for fish and wildlife planning.
Comments should be sent to one of
the addresses below.
The appendices to this series contain supplementary information for model
applications.
This
information
is
general
in
nature
although
certain
appendices may apply to only part of the model series.
For example, Appendix
A provides
specific
guidance
and model
appl ication
information
for
inland
aquatic
fish
species
and contains
sample field data sheets for collecting
aquatic field data and converting those data into habitat variable values.
Measurement techniques for terrestrial variables are summarized in Hays et al.
(1981).
Requests for models and appendices published in this series or
feedback
concerning model use should be sent to one of the following addresses:
Terrestrial and Inland Aquatic Species
Office of Biological Services
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, Colorado
80526
REFERENCES
Estuarine and Marine Species
Office of Biological Services
National Coastal Ecosystem Team
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
NASA/Slidell Computer Complex
1010 Gause Boulevard
Slidell, Louisiana
70458
Hays, R.L.,
C.
Summers, and
W.
Seitz.
1981.
Estimating wildlife
habitat
variables.
U.S.D.l. Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-81147.
III pp.
Mason, W.T.,
Jr.,
C.T.
Cushwa, C.J.
Slaski,
and
D.M.
Gladwin.
1979.
A
procedure
for describing
fish
and wildlife:
Coding
instructions
for
Pennsylvania.
U.S.D.I. Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-79/19. 21 pp.
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
1980a.
U.S.D.I.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
102.
Habitat Evaluation Procedures (HEP).
Division of Ecological Services.
ESM
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
1980b.
Selected vertebrate endangered species
of the seacoast of the United States.
U.S.D.I. Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-80/0 1.
U.S.
Fish
and Wildlife Service.
1981.
Standards
for
the
development
of
habitat
suitability
index
models
for
use
in
the
Habitat
Evaluation
Procedures, U.S.D.l.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Division of
Ecological
Services.
ESM 103.
2


to affect the llfe cycle and survlval of each speCles.
The models are deslgned to
be modified to evaluate specific habitat alterations using the HSI model building
techniques presented in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Habitat Evaluation
Procedures.
50272 '01
-
REPORT DOCUMENTATION
t-FWSlOBS~'82/1 0
i 2.
3. Recipient's Acc.ssion No.
PAGE
~. ntle and subtitle
5. Report Date
February 1982
Habitat Suitabi 1ity Index Model s :
Int roduct ion
6-
7. Author(s)
8. Performins 0l'lanization Rept. No.
Schamberger, Farmer, Terrell
9. Performins O/'Kanization Name and Address
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Grou
I:> 10.
Project/Task/Work Unit No.
Wes tern Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
11. ContractCC) or GrantCG) No.
Drake Creekside Building 1
(Cl
2625 Redwing Road
I (G)
Fort Collins, Colorado
80526
12. SDOnsorins Orllanization Name and Address
Western Energy and Land Use Team
13. Type of Report & Period Covered
Office of Biological Services
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of Interi or
1
14
•
JaJashi ngton , 0 C
20240
,
15. Supplementary Notes
- 15. Abstract (Limit: 200 words)
This is one
-j n a series of publications describing habitat requirements of selected
fish and wildlife species.
Numerous literature sources have been consulted in an
effort to consolidate scientific data on species-habitat relationships.
These data
have subsequently been synthesized into subjective Habitat Suitability Index (HSI)
, models.
The models are based on suitability indices formulated for variables found
17.
Document Analysis
a. Descriptors
Habi tabi 1i ty
Fishes
b.
Identifiers/CX!en·Ended Terms
Habitat
Habitat Suitability Index
,
c. COSATI Field/Group
IS. Availability Statem..nt
Unlimited
19.
Security Class (This Report)
Unclassified
, 20.
Security Class (This Pallel
Unclassified
I 21. No. of Pases
I
2
II 22.
Price
!
See ANSI-D9.18)
See 'nstructions on Reverse
U.S. CDVERNMENr PRINrI~ OFFICE: 1982-500-008/408
OPTIONAL FORM 272 (4-77)
(Formerly NTIS-35)
Departm..nt of Comm..rc ..


o
o
GXD
Headquarters- Office of Biological
Services, Washington, D.C.
Nat ional Coastal Ecosystems Team,
Slidell, La.
Western Energy and Land Use Team.
Fort Collins, Co.
Regional Offices
REGION 1
Regional Director
.S. Fish and WildlifeService
Lloyd Five Hundred Building, Suite 1692
500
.E. Multnomah Street
Portland . Oregon 97232
REGION 2
Regional Director
.S. Fish and WildlifeService
P.O. Box 1306
Albuquerque • . ev«Mexi 0
7103
REGION l
RegionalDirector
U.S. Fish and WildlifeService
Federal Bnilding, fort SneJring.
Twin Cities. Minnesota 55111 -
U.S. :FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
.REGIONAL OFFICES
REGION 4
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Richard B. Russell Building
75 Spring Street, S.W.
Atlanta, Georgia 30303
REGIO
5
Regional Director
.S. Fi h and WildlifeService
One Gateway Center
ewton Corner, Ma achusetts 0~15
REGION 6
<r,:
'Regional Director
us, Fish and WildlifeService
P.O. Box 25486
Denver Federal Center.
Denver. Colorado 80225
REGION 7
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and WildlifeService
1011 E. TudoiRoad-
Anehorage, AJask.99SQ3


DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
u.s. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
l '.S.
FISH a.WJLDUJo'E
HERVK;.:
~
" ''''
rt"
As the Nation's principal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has respon-
sibility for most of our .natlonally owned public lands and natural resources. This includes
fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources, protecting our fish and wildlife,
preserving the. environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The Department as-
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to assure that their development is in
the best interests of all our people. The Department also has a major responsibility for
American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. administration.
