--- 
source: 2008-34.pdf
--- 

98 
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Hubbs’ beaked whale; Fr - Baleine à bec de Hubbs; Sp - Zifio de Hubbs.
Fig. 241 Mesoplodon carlhubbsi
Distinctive Characteristics: Adult males of this
species are more readily identifiable than individu-
als of most other species of Mesoplodon. They
have a white rostrum and white “cap” in front of the
blowhole. Females and young are much more
difficult to identify.
Males also have a massive flattened tusk in the
middle of each side of the lower jaw, which pro-
trudes above the level of the upper jaw.
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 242 Skull
Mesoplodon carlhubbsi  Moore, 1963
ZIPH Mes 5        BUW
DORSAL VIEW
click for previous page


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae 
99
Can be confused with: The white cap and beak tip, and large tusks may allow bulls of this species to be
distinguished from other species of Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90).
Size: Maximum known size is 5.3 m for both sexes. Weights of over 1 400 kg are attained. Newborns are
about 2.5 m long.
Geographical Distribution: Apparently limited to the North Pacific, Hubbs’ beaked whale is known from
central British Columbia to southern California in the east, and from Japan in the west. It is an oceanic
species.
Biology and Behaviour: Very little is known about the biology of this species. The long, white, parallel
scratches on the bodies of males are thought to be caused by closed-mouth fighting in this and other species
of Mesoplodon. Hubbs’ beaked whales feed on squid and some deepwater fishes.
Exploitation: Some Hubbs’ beaked whales have been taken by harpoon off Japan.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 243


100
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Pygmy beaked whale; Fr - Baleine à bec pygmée; Sp - Ballena picuda.
Distinctive Characteristics: The pygmy beaked
whale is the most recently described member of
the genus, and appears to be the smallest of the
species of Mesoplodon. They tend to be dark grey
above and lighter below, apparently with little scar-
ring. They have small, triangular, wide-based dor-
sal fins that are shaped like those of harbour
porpoises.
The most distinctive characteristic is the teeth,
which are extremely small and egg-shaped in
cross-section (although generally they are not
visible in sightings at sea).
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Fig. 244 Mesoplodon peruvianus
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 245 Skull
Mesoplodon peruvianus Reyes, Mead, and Van Waerebeek, 1991 
ZIPH Mes 6        BPW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae
101
Can be confused with: The small triangular dorsal fin is different from that of most other species of
Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90), but using this character alone, it would be very difficult to dismiss the
possibility of other species in sightings at sea.
Size: This is the smallest known species of Mesoplodon; maximum known length is 3.7 m, apparently with
males larger than females. At birth, these animals are about 1.6 m long.
Geographical Distribution: The pygmy beaked whale is known only from 10 specimens and a few possible
sightings off Peru, all south of 8ºS and in the eastern tropical Pacific. Recently, there have been 2 strandings
of pygmy beaked whales near La Paz, Baja California, Mexico.
* Possibly extralimital record
Fig. 246
Biology and Behaviour: The diet consists of small mid-water fishes, oceanic squid, and shrimps. Groups
of 2 or 3 animals have been observed.
Exploitation:
Pygmy beaked whales are taken in the driftnet fishery for sharks off the coast of Peru.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.


102 
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Sowerby’s beaked whale; Fr - Baleine à bec de Sowerby; Sp - Zifio de Sowerby.
Fig. 247 Mesoplodon bidens
Distinctive Characteristics: Sowerby’s beaked
whales have the typical Mesoplodon body shape,
but tend to have a very long (for Mesoplodon) beak
and a bulge on the forehead. The 2 teeth of adult
males erupt from the middle of the lower jaw, and
are visible outside the closed mouth, although they
are not particularly large.
Coloration is not well known, but generally ap-
pears charcoal grey, with a lighter belly. White or
light grey spots are common on the body of adults;
however, young animals have less spotting.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 248 Skull
Mesoplodon bidens (Sowerby, 1804)
ZIPH Mes 7       BWW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae 
103
Can be confused with: Sowerby’s beaked whales might be confused with other species of Mesoplodon
(starting on p. 90) and even bulls would be nearly impossible to distinguish at sea from related species. The
limited distribution will help narrow the choices,
Size: Males reach lengths of at least 5.5 m and females, 5.1 m. Newborns average 2.4 m.
Geographical Distribution: These beaked whales are known only from the colder waters of the North
Atlantic, from at least Massachusetts to Labrador in the west, and from Iceland to Norway in the east. The
ranqe is known to include the Baltic Sea, but not the Mediterranean. The North Sea appears to be the centre
of abundance. There is a single record from the Gulf of Mexico, but this may represent
occurrence.
an extralimital
*  Extralimital record
Fig. 249
Biology and Behaviour: Almost nothing is known of the natural history of this species beyond what has
been learned from strandings, which have involved singles and pairs. Sowerby’s beaked whales feed on
squid and small fish. The breeding season appears to be late winter to spring.
Exploitation: Some are known to have been taken in Newfoundland in a small-scale fishery.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.


104
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Gervais’ beaked whale; Fr - Baleine à bec de Gervais; Sp - Zifio de Gervais.
Fig. 250 Mesoplodon europeaus
Distinctive Characteristics: Gervais’ beaked
whales are dark grey above and lighter grey be-
low. In young animals, the belly is white.
The teeth of adult males are found one-third of the
distance from the snout tip to the gape. They are
visible outside the closed mouth. The mouthline
is relatively straight.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 251 Skull
Mesoplodon europaeus Gervais, 1855
ZIPH Mes 8       BGW


Can be confused with: Gervais’ beaked whales are nearly impossible to distinguish at sea from other
species of Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90).
Size: Males attain lengths of at least 4.5 m, and adult females reach at least 5.2 m. Weights of at least
1 200 kg are attained. Newborns are about 2.1 m in length.
Geographical Distribution: Most records are from the east and Gulf coasts of North America, from New
York to Texas, but Gervais’ beaked whales are also known from several of the Caribbean islands. In the
eastern Atlantic, they are known from the English Channel to Guinea-Bissau in West Africa. There is also a
stranding at Ascension Island, in the central South Atlantic.
Biology and Behaviour: The favoured habitat of Gervais’ beaked whales appears to be warm temperate
and tropical waters. Like other members of the genus, they are known to feed on squid.
Exploitation: There is a record of 1 being taken in a net off New Jersey, and others may have been taken
in Caribbean small cetacean fisheries.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
*  Possibly extralimital record
Fig. 252
Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae 
105
click for next page
