--- 
source: 2008-24.pdf
--- 

Biological Services Program
and
Division of Ecological Services
Ll ~nr!
!i:;
' .~~ ; .;;.l Vir: ':~3 ~l d 3 Re3~:1 rC ! i Center
1:'
~3.
r~ ~h
;;~~.:~.i v\~= : :.i ; : re Service
7eu · -: :;J ~ i : ~ i Gr~ ·~ ~
E:}'...:~~ vard
L::;!syeik . LJ.. 'i0506
FWS/O8S-82/1 0.13
JULY 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
SMALLMOUTH BUFFALO
r::"h and Wildlife Service
). Department of the Interior
SK
36 1
. U54
no . 82-
10 .13


The Biological Services Program was established within the U.S. Fis h
and Wildlife Service to supply scientific information and methodologies on
key environmental issues that impact fish and wi ldli fe reso urces and their
supporting ecosystems.
The mission of the program is as follows:
•
To strengthen the Fish and Wi ldl ife Service i n its role as
a primary source of information on national fish and wild-
life resources, particularly in respect to environmental
impact assessment.
•
To gather, analyze, and present info rmation that wi ll aid
decisionmakers in the identification and re sol'ution of
problems associated with major changes in land and water
use.
•
To provide bet ter ecological informat ion and eval uat ion
for Department of the Interior development programs , such
as those relating to energy development.
Informat ion developed by the Biol ogical Services Program is i nt ended
for use in the planning and decis ionma ki ng process to prevent or mi nimize
the impact of development on fi sh and wi ldli fe.
Research activities and
tec hnical assistance services are based on an analysis of t he issues , a
determination of t he decisionmakers involved and the ir i nformati on needs,
and an evaluation of the state of t he art to identi fy information Haps
and to determine priorit ies.
This is a st rategy that wi ll ensure t hat
the products produced and di sseminated are t imely and useful.
Project s -have been initiated i n t he following areas:
coal ext ract ion
and convers ion; power plants; geothermal , mineral and oil shal e develop-
ment; wat er resource analysis , i ncludi ng stream alterations and west ern
water allocation ; coastal ecosystems and Outer Continental Shelf develop-
ment ; and systems invento ry , including Nati onal Wetl and Inventory,
habitat classi fication and analysi s, and informat ion transfer .
The Biological Services Program consists of the Office of Biological
Services in Washington. D.C ., wh ich i s res ponsi ble for overal l planning and
management; Nat.io.nal Teams, whi ch provide the Program's cent ral scientifi c
I
and tec hnical expertise and arrange for contract ing biolo9ica l services
studies with states, universities, consulting firms , and others; Regiona l
Staffs, who provide a link to problems at the operating leve l ; and staffs at
certain Fish and Wil dli fe Ser vice research facili t ies , who conduct in-house
research studi es.


FWS/OBS-82/10.13
July 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
SMALLMOUTH BUFFALO
by
Elizabeth A. Edwards
and
Katie Twomey
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, CO
80526
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington, DC
20240


This report should be cited as:
Edwards, E. A.• and K.
Twomey.
1982.
Habitat suitability index models:
smallmouth
buffalo.
U.S.
Dept.
Int.
Fish
Wildl.
Servo
FWS/OBS-82/10.13.
28 pp.


PREFACE
The habitat use information
and
Habitat Suitabil ity
Index
(HSI)
model s
presented in this document are an aid for impact assessment and habitat manage-
ment activities.
Literature
concerning
a
species'
habitat
requirements
and
preferences is reviewed and then synthesized into subjective HSI models, which
are scaled to produce an
index between
0 (unsuitable habitat)
and
1 (optimal
habitat).
Assumptions
used
to
transform
habitat
use
information
into these
mathematical
models
are
noted,
and
guidelines
for
model
application
are
described.
Any
models
found
in
the
literature
which
may also
be
used
to
calculate
an
HSI are cited,
and
simplified
HSI
models,
based
on
what
the
authors
believe
to
be
the
most
important
habitat characteristics
for this
species, are presented.
Use of
the
models
presented
in this
publication
for
impact
assessment
requires the setting of clear study objectives and may require modification of
the model s to meet those
objectives.
Methods
for
reducing
model
complexity
and
recommended
measurement
techniques
for
model
variables are presented in
Appendix A.
A description of various methods used to develop an
HSI model
is
provided in U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (1981)1.
The HSI models presented herein are complex hypotheses of species-habitat
relationships,
not
statements
of
proven
cause
and
effect
relationships.
Results
of
mode,-performance tests,
when available, are referenced;
however,
models
that
have
demonstrated reliability
in
specific
situations
may
prove
unreliable
in
others.
For
this
reason,
the
FWS
encourages
model
users
to
convey
comments
and
suggestions that
may help
us
increase
the
utility
and
effect i veness
of thi s
habi tat-based
approach
to
fi sh
and wil dl ife p1anni ng.
Please send comments to:
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
2625 Redwing Road
Ft. Collins,
CO
80526
1U.S.
Fish
and
Wildlife
Service.
1981.
Standards
for
the
development
of
habitat
suitability
index
models.
U.S.
Dept.
Int.
Fish
Wildl.
Servo
Washington, DC.
103
ESM
n.p.
iii


CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE................................................................
iii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
v
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
1
Genera1
1
Age, Growth, and Food
1
Reproduct ion
1
Specifi c Habitat Requi rements
2
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODELS..........
4
Model Applicability
4
Model Description - Riverine
5
Model Description - Lacustrine.....
8
Suitability Index (SI) Graphs for Model Variables
'"
9
Riveri ne Model....................................................
15
Lacustri ne Model..................................................
16
Interpreting Model Outputs
25
ADDITIONAL HABITAT MODELS
25
Mode1 1
25
Mode 1 2
25
REFERENCES
iv
25


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Douglas Jester,
Dave Willis,
and Bill Nelson
for
reviewing the manuscript.
Their review contributions are gratefully acknowl-
edged,
but
the
authors
accept
full
respons i bi 1i ty
for
the
contents
of
the
document.
We also would like to thank the Fisheries Cooperative Unit of Utah
State University
for
the
literature
search
they
provided
(Contract
Number
14-16-0009-79-041).
Cathy Short
provided
technical
editing assistance.
The
cover was illustrated by Jennifer Shoemaker.
v


SMALLMOUTH BUFFALO (Ictiobus bubalus)
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
General
The smallmouth buffalo (Ictiobus bubalus) ranges from the western portion
of the Hudson Bay drainage in Canada to the Ohio River and southward in
the
Mississippi
Valley
to
the
Gulf
States
and
northeastern
Mexico
(Hubbs
and
Lagler 1947; Eddy 1957; Jester 1973).
The species also has been reported in
the Missouri River drainage in Montana (Brown 1971) and South Dakota (Bailey
and Allum 1962) and has been introduced west
of
the Continental
Divide
in
Arizona (Johnson and Minckley 1972).
Hybridization of the smallmouth buffalo
with the black buffalo <1..
niger)
(Giudice
1964) and possible
hybridization
with the bigmouth buffalo (1. cyprinellus) (Giudice 1964; Johnson and Minckley
1969, 1972) has been reported.
Age, Growth, and Food
Size,
rather than
age,
determines maturity
in
the
smallmouth
buffalo.
Maturity is attained at approximately 450 g, which corresponds to ages of II
in Arkansas ponds and VII-X in Lewis and Clark Reservoir, South Dakota (Walburg
and Nelson 1966).
Smallmouth buffalo may reach a weight of about 18 kg, but
adults are usually 1-8 kg in weight and 38-78 cm in length (Pflieger 1975).
Cladocerans and copepods are the major
food
items of young smallmouth
buffalo
(McComish 1964).
Adults are opportunistic bottom feeders,
and their
diet
includes organisms that are
abundant,
such
as
zooplankton,
algae,
or
insect
larvae.
The occurrence
of certain
items
in
the digestive tract is
probably
governed
by the
availability
of
those
organisms
(McComish
1967;
Jester et al.
1969; Minckley et al. 1970; Perry 1970; Tafanelli et al. 1970).
In reservoirs, the species feeds primarily in shallow shoreline areas (McComish
1967; Minckley et al.
1970).
Buffalo growth is usually better over mud flats
and in
shallow water
than
in
rocky,
deep
portions
of
reservoirs
(Jenkins
1953).
This is probably due to the increased abundance of benthic organisms
and attached algae in these areas.
Reproduction
Spawning is initiated by rlslng water levels and increasing temperatures
(Canfield 1922; Walker and Frank 1952; Jester 1973).
Spawning has been report-
ed duri ng
spri ng
and summer (March-September)
when
temperatures
range
fron
13-280 C (Wrenn
1968,
1969;
Moody
1970;
Padilla
1972; Jester
1973).
Thf
1


adhesive eggs are scattered over the bottom and left unattended by the adults
~(Harlan and Speaker 1956; Jester 1973).
Spawning will occur over virtually
any type of bottom (Jester 1971).
Specific Habitat Requirements
Smallmouth buffalo typically inhabit large rivers (Johnson 1963), prefer-
ring deep,
clear,
warm waters with a current (Trautman 1957; Martin 1963).
They
are
characteristically
found
in
firm-bottomed
channels,
chutes,
and
cut-off areas (Trautman 1957; Minckley 1959; Brown 1971; Kozel 1974) of medium
to
large-sized
rivers
(Finnell
et
al.
1956;
Pflieger
1975;
Smith
1979).
Smallmouth buffalo frequent
low velocity areas,
such as pools, creekmouths,
and backwaters of large rivers (Kallemeyn and Novotny 1977).
The species is
found less frequently in small streams (Deacon 1961; Brown 1971).
Smallmouth buffalo can do well
in
large reservoirs or
lakes and their
st.andt ng crop
increases as the storage ratio (SR) (ratio
of
man
reservoi r
water
volume
to
annual discharge volume) decreases (Jenkins 1976).
Fairly
shallow water
(1.2-1.4 m)
with
abundant
aquatic
or
inundated
terrestrial
vegetation and a silt bottom is the
most productive habitat for smallmouth
buffalo (Dalquest and Peters 1966).
Cover may not be a critical
requirement
in lakes and reservoirs.
The species may also be found in upstream headwaters
of
reservoi rs , adjoi ni ng
infl owi ng
streams,
or areas
wi th
moderate current
(Jenkins 1953; Dalquest and Peters 1966; Beckman and Elrod 1971).
Smallmouth
buffalo lacustrine distributions are strongly associated with the bottom, and
the species is found in relatively uniform densities at all depths along the
bottom (Jester 1971).
There is no heavy seasonal concentration or movement,
except
to
spawn i ng areas in the spri ng.
However,
there is a tendency
for
smallmouth buffalo to move to shallower water in spring and summer and deeper
water in fall and winter (Huntington and Hill 1956; Jester 1973).
Smallmouth buffalo can tolerate turbid waters (> 100 JTU), but growth is
better
in
moderately
turbid
to
clear
waters
(25-100 JTU)
(Trautman
1957;
Pflieger 1975; Willis 1978)
A pH range of 6.5-8.5 is considered to be essential for good production
of freshwater fish (Stroud 1967), and a pH range of 5.0-6.5 or 8.5-9.0 can be
detrimental
to
fish
populations
(Doudoroff
and Katz 1950; European
Inland
Fisheries
Advisory
Commission
1969).
Smallmouth
buffalo
populations
are
apparently unaffected in waters up to a pH of 8.5 in Southwest reservoirs and
rivers (Jester, personal communication).
Thus, a range of 6.5-8.5 is assumed
to be optimum for smallmouth buffalo.
Adult.
Moderately warm temperatures are necessary for growth and repro-
duction in the smallmouth buffalo.
In 90% of the streams sampled along
the
Texas coast and in the Mississippi Valley which contained smallmouth buffalo,
weekly mean summer (July-August)
temperatures
ranged from 17-32° C,
with an
overall
mean of 24° C (Biesinger, personal communication).
It is assumed that
these temperatures are adequate for growth of
small mouth buffalo.
In South
Dakota,
seasonal
growth begins when water
temperatures reach 18° C (Shields
1957).
Gammon (1973) reported that smallmouth buffalo were collected in water
near a thermal effluent with a temperature of 31-34° C.
2


The specific dissolved oxygen (DO) requirements of smallmouth buffalo are
not known,
but 5.0 mg/l is considered the minimum level
for maintaining good
freshwater fish populations (Environmental
Protection Agency 1976).
Carp are
able to live for short periods at a DO level as low as 3 mg/l, but optimum
DO
levels are> 6 mg/l
(Huet
1970).
It is assumed that smallmouth buffalo are
somewhat less tolerant of low DO levels than carp (Jester, personal communica-
t ion).
Smallmouth buffalo adults are commonly found in rivers with currents up
to
100 cm/sec
(Trautman
1957;
Kallemeyn
and Novotny
1977).
There
is
some
evidence that elimination of currents and chutes by dams may decrease small-
mouth buffalo populations (Trautman 1957).
In New Mexico, there are almost no
buffalo in the Rio Grande below Elephant Butte Dam down to Caballo Lake, yet
they are abundant in both lakes (Jester, personal communication).
The species
can inhabit high velocity areas (up to 160 cm/sec) of main channels for short
periods (Kallemeyn and Novotny 1977).
Pools and backwaters of
rivers
(with
velocities
of
< 20 cm/sec)
are
generally
utilized
for
resting and nursery
areas (Kallemeyn and Novotny 1977).
Smallmouth buffalo salinity tolerances are not known, but bigmouth buffalo
are tolerant of relatively saline conditions.
Bigmouth buffalo juveniles can
tolerate salinities up to 12 ppt in the laboratory for short periods (Hollander
1974).
It is assumed that smallmouth buffalo also can tolerate salinities at
this level.
However,
normal salinity levels for reservoirs range from about
2,200 ppm
to
20 ppm
(2.2
to
0.02 ppt)
TDS
(Jenkins' 1967).
Jenkins
(1967,
1976) correlated an increase in TDS levels with an increase in standing crops
of all reservoir fish, including buffalo.
Embryo.
In rivers,
spawning usually occurs
in
areas with very little
current
(~ 20 cm/sec),
such as
backwaters,
marshes,
and
pool s
(Wrenn
1968;
Kallemeyn and Novotny 1977).
In reservoirs, spawning occurs in embayments and
along recently flooded shorelines (Wrenn 1968; Walburg
1976;
Moody
1970) at
depths
of
approximately
1.2-6.1 m (Moody
1970;
Padilla
1972).
Smallmouth
buffa10 wi 11 scatter thei r eggs over all
bottom types but
show a preference
for spawning over vegetation and submerged objects when available (Moody 1970;
Benson 1973; Jester 1973; Willis and Owen 1978).
In a reservoir with fluctuat-
ing water levels,
reproduction may still be successful even though the extent
of optimum spawning habitat is reduced (Jester 1971).
Optimum spawning temperatures are
17-24° C, within
a range
of
13-28° C
(Wrenn
1969;
Padilla
1972;
Jester
1973).
The maximum weekly average tem-
perature for spawning is
21° C (Heard
1958; Giudice
1964;
Brungs and Jones
1977).
Incubation takes 4-12 days at 14-21° C (Walburg and Nelson 1966; Wrenn
1969) .
The dissolved oxygen requirements of smallmouth buffalo embryos have not
been reported,
but it is assumed that they are slightly less tolerant than
carp embryos (Jester, personal communication; Willis, personal
communication).
Survival of carp embryos can occur at DO levels as low as 1.2 mg/l, but devel-
opment is slowed and only
4% survive (Kaur and Toor 1978).
Percent hatching
of
carp embryos increased as
DO levels increased;
65% hatched at 6 mg/l and
92% hatched at 9 mg/l (Kaur and Toor 1978).
3


Bigmouth buffalo eggs do well
at salinities
as
high
as
9 ppt
in
the
laboratory
(Hollander
1974).
Smallmouth
buffalo
are
assumed
to
tolerate
similar salinity levels.
Fry_
Warm, shallow, vegetated tributary embayments of reservoirs (Jester
1973)
and
quiet
pools,
marshes,
and backwaters
«
20 cm/sec
velocity)
of
rivers (Kallemeyn and Novotny
1977)
provide optimum conditions
for
survival
and growth of smallmouth buffalo fry.
Temperature requirements for smallmouth
buffalo
fry
have
not
been
reported
and are
assumed
to
be
sl ightly
more
restri cted
than
those for
carp fry.
Under 1aboratory conditions,
carp fry
will tolerate temperatures as high as
36° C and die at 38° C (Tatarko 1970).
In
90% of
the
streams
sampled along the Texas coast and in the Mississippi
Valley where smallmouth buffalo were found, weekly mean temperatures for June
and July
ranged
from
16-32° C (Biesinger,
personal
communication).
It is
assumed that backwaters and marshes would be slightly warmer for fry;
maximum
growth of fry woul d occur at the warmer end of the range.
.
Bigmouth buffalo fry can tolerate salinities up to 9 ppt in the laboratory
(Hollander 1974), and smallmouth buffalo fry are assumed to tolerate similar
levels.
Juvenile.
The
specific
habitat
requirements
of
juvenile
smallmouth
buffalo are not known.
Their requirements may be similar to those of adults,
except that juveniles probably prefer only warm, shallow, vegetated areas not
in the main current.
They were collected almost exclusively at velocities of
< 20 cm/sec
in
pools
or
marsh and
backwater
areas
of
the
Missouri
River
(Kallemeyn and Novotny 1977).
It is assumed that juveni 1e small mouth buffalo temperature requi rements
are similar to those of fry since they primarily utilize the same habitat.
Salinity tolerance
levels for smallmouth buffalo juveniles are unknown,
but
since juvenile bigmouth buffalo are able
to
tolerate
salinities
up to
12 ppt
in
the
laboratory for
short periods
(Hollander
1974), it is assumed
that levels for juvenile smallmouth buffalo are similar.
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODELS
Model Applicability
Geographic area.
The
model
is
applicable
throughout
the
native
and
introduced range of the smallmouth buffalo in North America.
The standard of
comparison for each individual variable suitability index is the optimum value
of the variable that occurs anywhere within this region.
Therefore, the model
may never provide an HSI
of
1.0 when applied to waters
in
the North where
temperature-related variables
may
not
reach
the optimum values found in the
South.
4


Season.
The model provides a rating for waters based on their ability to
support a reproducing population of smallmouth buffalo through all seasons of
the year.
The model will
provide an HSI of
0.0 if any reproduction-related
variable indicates that the species is not able to reproduce.
Cover types.
The model is applicable in riverine and lacustrine habitats
as described by Cowardin et al. (1979).
Minimum habitat area.
Minimum habitat area
is
defined
as
the
mt mmum
area of contiguous suitable habitat that is required for a species to live and
reproduce.
No attempt has been made to establish a minimum habitat size for
smallmouth buffalo, although this species prefers larger rivers and reservoirs.
Verifi cation 1eve1.
The acceptance goal
of
the model
is to produce an
index between 0 and 1 which has a positive relationship to spawning success of
adults
and carrying
capacity
for fry,
juveniles,
and adults.
In order to
verify that the model ouput was acceptable, HSI's were calculated from sample
data sets.
These sample data sets and their relationship to model verification
are discussed in greater detail later.
Model Description - Riverine
Analysis of smallmouth buffalo habitat quality is based on basic habitat
components consisting of food, cover, water quality, and reproduction require-
ments.
Variables that have been shown to affect growth, survival, abundance,
or
other
measures
of
well-being
of
smallmouth
buffalo
are
placed
in
the
appropriate component (Figures 1 and 2).
.
Food-cover component.
Food
and
cover
have
been
aggregated
into
one
component because the variables within this component describe both
food and
cover
suitability.
In
pools
and
off-channel
areas
of
rivers,
cover (V15 )
provides resting areas for adults and feeding areas and protection from preda-
tion for fry and juveniles.
Vegetative cover also may be an indication of the
productivity
of
an
area.
Smallmouth buffalo are opportunistic
feeders
and
abundance of aquatic vegetation may be a measure of food availability for this
species
in
backwaters and marshes since aquatic vegetation and algae may be
injested.
Percent pools and off-channel areas (V2 )
are included to quantify
the amount of food-cover habitat.
Water guality component.
Temperature
levels
for adults,
juveniles, and
fry
(Vs and V7 ) ,
along with dissolved oxygen (V.) and pH (V 4 ) , are important
since these parameters may affect growth, survival, and feeding in smallmouth
buffalo.
Turbidity (V3 )
is included because high species abundance has been
correlated with moderate to
low turbidities.
Salinity (V 12 )
is an optional
variable since it is not considered to be a potential
problem in
most areas
where smallmouth buffalo are found.
5


Habitat Variables
LHe Requi sites
% vegetative cover (V 1 S )
Food-cover (CF-C)
% pools and off-channel areas (V 2 ) ----------
Temperature (V s and V7 )
Dissolved oxygen (VB)
pH (V 4 )
__ ~
---
Turbidity (V 3 )
--
---
Sa1i ni ty (V12) -
-
-
HSI
Stream width (V
1
) -~==========::::=:=:=o- Other (COT)
Current velocity (V lO )
-
% vegetative cover (V 15 )
----~'""'__
% pools and off-channel areas (V 2 )
Poo1 ve1ocity (V 11) ~=====~~~~:=====~~~
Dissolved oxygen (V g )
Temperature (V 6 )
Figure 1.
Tree diagram illustrating relationship of habitat variables
and l·ife requisites in the riverine model for the smallmouth buffalo.
Dashed line indicates an optional variable in the model.
6


Habitat Variables
Life Requisites
HSI
Storage ratio (V 13 ) -------------- Other (COT)
Temperature (Vs and V7)~
Dissolved oxygen (V.)
pH (V4) .~~~=======:~:::~::::=§~~
--
Turbidity (V 3 )
_-----
---
Sal inity (V 12 ) -
- --
% vegetative cover (V1LSS~)~=============- Food-cover (CF-C)
% littoral area (V16)-
Dissolved oxygen (V g )
Temperature (V6~~~~~========~~~~~~~~
Substrate (V14)
% vegetative cover (V1S)
% littoral area (V16)
% area 1.2-6.1 m deep (V17)
Figure 2.
Tree diagram illustrating relationship of habitat variables
and life requisites in the lacustrine model for the smallmouth buffalo.
Dashed line indicates an optional variable in the model .
.-
7


Reproduction component.
Percent vegetative (aquatic and inundated terres-
trial)
cover
(V 15 )
reflects the quality of the
spawning habitat which can
affect
survival and production of the embryo.
Percent pools and off-channel
areas
(V 2 )
quantify the amount of spawning habitat.
Average pool
velocity
(V 1 1 )
is included since the development of quality nursery habitat depends on
very
low velocities.
Dissolved oxygen (Vg )
and average temperature (V,) are
parameters that can limit embryo survival and development.
"Other" component.
The variables within the "other" component are those
which aid in describing habitat suitability for
smalltnouth buffalo, yet are
not
specifically
related
to
life
requisite
components already
presented.
Average
stream width
(V 1 )
is
included
since
smallmouth buffalo are
seldom
found
in
smaller streams.
Average current velocity (V lO )
is included since
adults frequent areas of the river with strong current velocities, as well
as
low velocity areas.
Model Description - Lacustrine
Food-cover component.
Food
and
cover
have
been
aggregated
into
one
component since the variables within this
component describe both
food
and
cover suitability.
In shallow shoreline areas, cover (V 1 S )
provides resting
and feeding areas for
the
species.
Primary production (aquatic vegetation)
also
may be an indication of reservoir productivity.
Smallmouth buffalo are
opportunistic feeders and vegetation abundance would be a relative measure of
food availability for the
species.
Percent littoral area (V u
) is included
since this variable quantifies the amount of food-cover habitat.
Water quality component.
See riverine model
description for
the
water
quality component.
Reproduct ion component.
Di sso1ved oxygen (Vg)
and average temperatures
during spawning (V,) are parameters that can limit embryo survival and devel-
opment.
Substrate type (V 1 4 )
available for spawning is included since there
is a preference by the species for vegetation (especially inundated vegetation)
even though they will
spawn over any substrate.
Percent littoral
area (V u
)
quantifies the amount of spawning habitat that may have vegetation.
Since the
species spawns at a specific depth, percent area that is 1.2-6.1 m deep during
spawning (V 1 7 ) is included to quantify the total area available for spawning.
"Other" component.
Storage
ratio
(SR)
(V 1 3 )
is
included
since
an
increase in standing crop of large and smallmouth buffalo has been positively
correlated with a decrease in SR.
8


Suitability Index (51) Graphs for Model Variables
This
section
contains
suitability
index
graphs
for
the
17 variables
described above and equations for combining selected variable indices into a
species HSl using the component approach.
Variables may pertain to either a
riverine (R) habitat, a lacustrine (L) habitat, or both.
Habitat
Variable
Average stream width
during average summer
flow.
1.0
·x
Q) 0.8
"'Cs::....
~ 0.6
.r-....
•r-
.c 0.4
10
~
.r-::s
(/') 0.2
Suitability Graph
20
m
40
60
R,L
Percent pools and off-
channel areas (e.g.,
ponds and marshes)
during spring and
summer (adult, embryo,
juvenile, and fry).
1.0
x
Q) 0.8
"'Cs::....
>, 0.6
~
.r-....
:c 0.4
10
~
-e--
~ 0.2
9
25
50
%
75
100


R,L
R,L
Maximum monthly average
turbidity during average
summer flow or summer
stratification.
pH levels during the year.
1.0
X
QJ
"0 0.8
c.....
~0.6
'r-
~ 0.4
+l
'r-
:3
V) 0.2
1.0
X
QJ
"0 0.8
c.....
~0.6
'r-
'r-
~ 0.4
+l
'r-
:3
V) 0.2
50
100
150
200
JTU
R,L
Average water temp-
eratures where the
species occurs during
July-August (adult).
10
x
~ 0.8
c.....
~0.6
'r-
~ 0.4
+l
'r-
3
10
5
pH
20
7
30
9
11
40


R,L
VI
Average maximum water
1.0
I
temperatures during
spring and summer
x
(embryo).
~0.8
c-
~0.6
'r-
r-
:0 0.4-
10
+.l
'r-a0.2-
,
I
I
10
20
30
40
°C
R,L
V,
Average water temp-
1.0
eratures during June-
x
July (fry and juvenile).
GJ-g 0.8-
~0.6
'r-
r-
'r-
-g 0.4
+.l
'r-
::::J
V) 0.2
10
20
°C
30
40
R,L
V.
Average minimum dissolved
oxygen levels during the
summer (adult, fry, and
juvenil e).
1. 0 +-_L-----J._.......L.._...;-_+_
X
GJ O. 8
~c-
~0.6
'r-
r-
:00.4
10
+.l
'r-
aO.2
11
3
4
5
mg/1
6
7


R,L
R
Vg
Minimum dissolved oxygen
levels during spawning
(embryo) .
Average current velocity
of the river during
average summer flow
(adult).
X
OJ
-g 0.8
......
~
'r- O. 6
r-
'r-
..0
~0.4
~
V1 O. 2
x
~0.8
s::
......
~0.6
r-
:c 0.4
~
~ 0.2
4
6
mg/1
8
10
R
Average pool velocity
(embryo, fry, and
juvenile).
1.0
x
~ 0.8
s::
......
~0.6
-e--
r-
'r-
~ 0.4
~
'r-
~ 0.2
50
100
150
200
em/sec
12
20
em/sec
40
60


R,L
L
Maximum salinity during
spring and summer.
Note:
V1 2 may be omitted
if salinity is not
considered to be a
potential problem
within the study area.
Storage ratio (SR).
1.0
x
~ 0.8
c......
~0.6
.....
r-
.....
~ 0.4
+'
.....
::l
V) 0.2
1.0
x
Q)
"0 0.8
c......
~0.6
.....
r-.....
~ 0.4
+'
.....
::l
V) 0.2
0.02
1.0
2.5
5.0 10.0
ppt
0.1
0.2
0.5
SR
1.0
2.0
L
V11+
Dominant substrate type
1.0
for spawning (embryo)
x
A)
Inundated terres-
~ 0.8
trial, submergent
c......
or emergent aquatic
>, O. 6
vegetation;
+'
.....
B)
Logs, brush,
r-
:0 0.4
detritus, and
ttl
other objects;
+'
.....
e)
Mud, grave 1, and
~ 0.2
sand.
-
f-
f-
f-
f-
13
A
B
c


R,L
Percent vegetative
cover (aquatic and
inundated terres-
trial) in pools and
off-channel areas or
along the shoreline
during spring and
summer (fry and
juvenil e).
1. 0 -+-__--J
+
~
~ 0.8
"'0
~
......
e-, O. 6
+.>
.....
r-:c 0.4
to
+.>
.....
~ 0.2
L
Percent littoral area
during summer.
10
x-& 0.8
~
......
~0.6
.....
r-:c 0.4
to
+.>
.....
20
25
%
50
%
30
75
40
100
L
Percent area of the
lacustrine environment
1.2-6.1 m deep during
spawning (spring and
summer).
1.0
x
-& 0.8
s:::
......
~0.6
.....
r-.....
~ 0.4
+.>
.....
::lV'l0.2
14
25
50
%
75
100


Riverine Model
These equations utilize the life requisite approach and consist of four
components:
food-cover; water quality; reproduction; and other.
Food-Cover (CF-C)
CF-C = (V 2 x V1 s)1/2
Water Quality (CWQ)
1/2
V3 + V4 + 2 [(Vs x V7 )
]
CWQ =
6
+2Va , or
If (V s x V7)1/2 or Va is ~ 0.4, then CWQ equals the lowest of
1/2
the following:
(V s x V7 )
; Va; or the above equation.
If
either Vs or V7 is
~ 0.4, then the lowest rating should be sub-
stituted in the above equation for the expression (Vs x V7)1/ 2.
Note:
If V1 2 (optional salinity variable) is added,
1/2
V3 + V4 + 2 [(Vs x V7 )
]
+2Va + V1 2
CWQ =
7
Reproduction (CR)
15


Other (COT)
HSI determination
, or V1 , whichever is lower.
HSI = (CF-C x CWQ x CR
2
If any component s 0.4,
components or the above
Lacustrine Model
1/5
x COT)
,or
then the HSI equals the lowest of the
equation.
This
model
utilizes the life requisite
approach
and consists
of
four
components:
food-cover; water quality; reproduction; and other.
Food-Cover (CF-C)
Water Quality (CWQ)
Same as riverine model for water quality.
Reproduction (CR)
Other (COT)
16


HSI determination
1/6
HSI = (CF-C x CWQ
2 x CR
2 x COT)
If CWQ or CR is
~ 0.4, the HSI equals the lowest of the following:
CWQ; CR; or the above equation.
Sources of data and assumptions made in developing the suitability indices
are presented in Table 1.
Sample data sets for the riverine and lacustrine HSI models are listed in
Tables 2 and 3.
The data sets are not actual field measurements, but represent
combinations that could occur in a riverine or lacustrine habitat.
The HSI's
calculated from the data reflect what the carrying capacity trends would be in
riverine
and lacustrine habitats with the listed characteristics and,
there-
fore, meet the acceptance goal.
17


Table 1.
Data sources and assumptions for smallmouth
buffalo suitability indices.
Variable and source
Finnell et al. 1956
Trautman 1957
Pflieger 1975
Smith 1979
Kallemeyn and Novotny
1977
Trautman 1957
Pflieger 1975
Willis 1978
Doudoroff and Katz
1950 (FW)
Stroud 1967 (FW)
EIFAC 1969 (C)
Shields 1957
Gammon 1973
Biesinger 1980
Heard 1958
Giudice 1964
Wrenn 1969
Padill a 1972
Jester 1973
Brungs and Jones 1977
Assumption
The size of river associated with
abundant numbers of fish has high
suitability.
Since pools and off-channel areas of
rivers are necessary for resting,
spawning, and nurseries, it is assumed
that the river habitat must contain a
certain percentage of these areas for
habitat to be suitable.
Yet, too much
pool area is suboptimum to unsuitable
since adults also prefer main channel
areas.
Turbidity levels associated with high
numbers are optimum.
Levels that are
tolerated but which slow growth are
suboptimum.
The pH levels that promote good pro-
duction of freshwater fish are assumed
to be optimum for smallmouth buffalo.
Average midsummer temperatures where
smallmouth buffalo are found are
adequate for growth.
Temperatures must
reach levels that permit growth in
order for habitat to be suitable.
Pre-
ferred temperatures near a thermal
effluent or under laboratory conditions
are not necessarily optimum.
Temperatures where normal development
and maximum survival occur are optimum.
Temperatures that result in little or
no survival are unsuitable.
18


V,
Variable and source
Tatarko 1970
Biesinger 1980
Doudoroff and Shumway
1970 (C)
Huet 1970 (C)
Environmental Protection
Agency [1976 (FW)]
Kaur and Toor 1978
Table 1. (Continued).
Assumption
Same assumption as Vs .
Dissolved oxygen levels that promote
maximum growth and survival for
freshwater fish are optimum.
Levels
that are adequate for carp but which
reduce growth are suboptimum.
Levels
that can cause death of carp after
prolonged exposure have very low
suitability.
Percent hatching of carp embryos in-
creases as dissolved oxygen levels
increase.
Levels where greater than
60% of the embryos survived have high
suitability.
Optimum levels do not
necessarily mean maximum survival.
Lack of survival is unsuitable.
Trautman 1957
Kallemeyn and Novotny 1977
Kallemeyn and Novotny 1977
Jenkins 1967
Hollander 1974 (BB)
(Optional variable)
Jenkins 1976
Average current velocities where adults
are predominantly found are optimum.
Adults need areas of both strong and
slow currents.
Current velocities that are associated
with an abundance of fry and juvenile
and maximum survival of embryo are
optimum.
Velocities that are associated
with fair to poor nursery habitat are
suboptimum to unsuitable.
Salinities (TDS) that are associated
with high standing crops are optimum.
Normal salinity levels for reservoirs
are optimum to suboptimum.
Sea water
salinity levels tolerated for short
periods in laboratory conditions are
unsuitable.
Storage ratios associated with high
standing crop are optimum.
19


Variable and source
Vu
Moody 1970
Jester 1971
Benson 1973
Jester 1973
V15
Dalquest and Peters 1966
Jester 1973
Table 1. (Concluded).
Assumption
The substrate type that is associated
.with maximum spawning success is
optimum.
Successful spawning will
occur on other substrates that have
high suitability.
The amount of vegetation associated
with high numbers of juvenile and fry
is optimum.
However,. abundant vegeta-
tion is not required for suitable
habitat.
V1 6
Jenkins 1953
Dalquest and Peters 1966
McComish 1967
Minckley et al. 1970
V1 7
Moody 1970
Padi11 a 1972
Since shallow water with vegetation is
the most productive habitat for small-
mouth buffalo, it is assumed that the
percentage of littoral area with the
highest species abundance is optimum.
Since smallmouth buffalo need deeper
water in winter, too much littoral area
is assumed to be suboptimum to unsuitable.
Successful spawning depends on the
amount of area 1.2-6.1 m deep.
The
percent area associated with high
standing crop is optimum.
Note:
C=carp data
FW =data for freshwater fish in general
BB = bigmouth buffalo data
20


Table 2.
Sample data sets using riverine HS1 model.
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
Variable
Data
SI
Data
SI
Data
SI
River width (m)
V1
32
1.0
17
0.8
7
0.5
% pools, creekmouths,
and backwater areas V2
15
0.6
17
0.7
10
0.4
Turbidity (JTU)
V3
50
0.9
120
0.4
110
0.6
pH
V,.
6.2
0.7
8.2
0.9
5.6
0.3
Temperature (adult)
Vs
26
1.0
21
0.8
29
0.6
(0 C)
Temperature (embryo)
Vs
22
1.0
14
0.6
27
0.2
(0 C)
Temperature (fry and
juvenile) (0 C)
V7
31
0.8
23
0.9
33
0.3
Dissolved oxygen
(adult, fry, and
juvenile) (mg/l)
V.
7.0
1.0
5.5
0.8
4.0
0.3
Dissolved oxygen
(embryo) (mg/l)
V9
7.0
1.0
4.8
0.4
4.0
0.2
Average velocity
(adult) cm/sec
VlD
55
0.9
100
0.8
120
0.6
Pool velocity
(embryo, fry, and
juvenile) (cm/sec)
Vll
20
1.0
5
1.0
35
0.4
Salinity (ppt)
V12
2
0.7
2.5
0.6
3
0.5
% vegetative cover
Vu
40
1.0
10
0.6
10
0.6
21


Table 2.
(concluded).
Variable
Data set 1
Data
51
Data set 2
Data
51
Data set 3
Data
51
Component 51
CF-C =
0.77
0.65
0.49
CWQ=
0.87
0.74
0.30
CR =
0.93
0.59
0.29
COT =
0.95
0.80
0.50
HS1 =
0.89
0.67
0.30
22


Table 3.
Sample data sets using lacustrine HS1 model.
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
Variable
Data
SI
Data
SI
Data
51
Turbidity (JTU)
V3
50
0.9
120
0.4
110
0.6
pH
V4
6.2
0.7
8.5
0.6
4.8
0.1
Temperature (adult)
(0 C)
Vs
26
1.0
20
0.7
29
0.6
Temperature (embryo)
(0 C)
V6
22
1.0
14
0.6
28
0.0
Temperature (fry,
juvenile) (0 C)
V7
31
0.8
22
0.7
32
0.5
Dissolved oxygen
(adult,fry, and
juvenile) (mg/l)
Va
7.0
1.0
5.0
0.7
4.0
0.3
Dissolved oxygen
(embryo) (mg/l)
Vg
4.0
0.2
5.5
0.6
4.0
0.2
Salinity (ppt)
V12
2.0
0.7
2.5
0.6
3.0
0.5
Storage ratio (SR)
Vll
0.25
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.1
1.0
Substrate (embryo)
V14
Vegetation
1.0
Mud
0.7
Gravel
0.7
% vegetative cover
(fry and juvenile)
V15
40
1.0
10
0.4
10
0.4
% littoral
V16
30
1.0
20
0.8
5
0.3
% area 1.2-6.1 m
V17
30
1.0
25
0.8
12
0.4
23


Table 3.
(concluded).
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
Variable
Data
51
Data
51
Data
SI
Component SI
CF-C =
1. 00
0.57
0.35
CWQ =
0.87
0.63
0.41
CR
::::
0.67
0.62
0.00
COT ::::
0.70
0.40
1.00
HSI
=
0.79
0.57
0.00
24


Interpreting Model Outputs
The smallmouth buffalo
HSI
determined
by use
of these models will
not
necessarily represent the population of smallmouth buffalo in
the study area;
habitats with an
HSI
of 0 may contain
some smallmouth baffalo and habitats
with a high HSI may contain very few.
This is because the standing crop does
not totally depend
on the ability of a habitat to meet all
life requisite
requirements of the species.
If the model is a good representation of small-
mouth buffalo riverine or lacustrine habitat,
then
in areas where
smallmouth
buffalo population levels are due primarily to
habitat related factors,
the
model should be positively correlated with long-term average population levels.
However, thi s has not been tested.
The proper i nterpretati on of the
HSI
is
one of compari son.
If two habitats
have di fferent
HSI IS,
the one with the
higher HSI should have the potential to support more smallmouth buffalo than
the one with the lower HSI, given the model assumptions have not been violated.
ADDITIONAL HABITAT MODELS
Modell
An
optimum
riverine
HSI
model
consists
of
the
following
conditions,
assuming water quality is not limiting:
large to medium sized rivers (> 5 m
Width), with some current «
100 em/sec); warm summer temperatures (22-26° C);
clear «
25 JTU) waters;
and vegetated,
shallow shoreline areas,
backwaters,
or marshes for spawning.
HSI = number of above criteria met
5
Model 2
An
optimum lacustrine
HSI
model consists of the
following conditions,
assuming water quality is not limiting:
large reservoirs;
warm summer water
temperatures (22-26° C);
clear«
25 JTU) waters;
and vegetated littoral zones
for spawning.
REFERENCES
HSI
number of above criteria met
=
.:..:...=.:.:..:.::...::...:....-~-=~:....::....,,..=-~~;....::--"=~
4
Bailey,
R. M., and M.
O. Allum.
1962.
Fishes of South Dakota.
Misc.
Publ.
Museum of Zool., Univ. Mich. 119:79-80.
25


Beckman,
L. G.,
and J.
H.
Elrod.
1971.
Apparent abundance and distribution
of young-of-the-year fi shes in
Lake Dahe,
1965-69.
Pages 333-347 .in G.
E.
Hall,
ed.
Reservoir fisheries
and
limnology.
Am.
Fish.
Soc.
Spec.
Publ. 8.
Benson, N. G.
1973.
Evaluating the effects of discharge rates, water levels,
and
peaking on fish populations in Missouri
River main stem reservoirs.
Pages 683-689 lfl W. C. Ackerman, G. F. White, and E. B. Worthington,
eds.
Man-made
lakes:
Their
problems
and
environmental effects.
Geophysical
Monogr. Ser. Vol. 17.
Biesinger,
K.
E.
1980.
Personal
communication.
U.S.
Environ.
Res.
Lab.,
Duluth, Minnesota.
Brown, C. J.
D.
1971.
Fishes of Montana.
Big Sky Books.
Montana State Univ.
Bozeman.
207 pp.
Brungs,
W.
A.,
and B.
R.
Jones.
1977.
fi sh:
Protocol
and
procedures.
Minnesota. EPA-600/3-77-061.
130 pp.
Temperature criteria
for
freshwater
U.S.
Environ.
Res.
Lab.,
Duluth,
Canfield,
H.
L.
1922.
Care and feeding of buffalo fish
in
ponds.
U.S.
Bur.
Fish., Econ. Circ. 56.
3 pp.
Cowardin,
L. M.,
V.
Carter,
F. C. Golet, and E. J.
LaRoe.
1979.
Classifica-
tion of wetlands and deepwater habitats of the United States.
U.S.D.!.
Fish and Wildlife Service, FWS/DBS-79/31.
103 pp.
Dalquest,
W.
W.,
and
L.
J.
Peters.
1966.
A life
history
study of four
problematic fish
in
Lake Diversion,
Archer and
Baylor Counties,
Texas.
IF Report Series 6.
Deacon, J.
E.
1961.
Fish populatons,
following a drought in the Neosho and
Marais des Cvnes rivers of Kansas.
Univ. Kansas Publ. 13(9):359-427.
Doudoroff,
P.,
and
M.
Katz.
1950.
Critical
review
of
literature
on the
toxicity of industrial wastes and their components to Fish.
I. Alkalies,
acids,
and
inorganic
gases.
Sewage
and
Industrial
Wastes
22(11):1432-1458.
Doudoroff,
P.,
and
D.
L.
Shumway.
1970.
Dissolved
oxygen
requirements
of
freshwater fishes.
FAD Fish. Tech. Pap. 86.
291 pp.
Eddy, S.
1957.
How to know the freshwater fishes.
W.
C. Brown Co.,
Dubuque,
Iowa.
252 pp.
European
Inland
Fisheries Advisory
Commission.
1969.
Report
on extreme
pH
values and inland fisheries.
Water Res. 3(8):593-611.
Environmental
Protection
Agency.
1976.
Quality criteria
for
water.
U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
256 pp.
26


Finnell, J. D.,
R.
M. Jenkins, and G.
E. Hall.
1956.
The fishery resources
of the Little River system, McCurtain County, Okalahoma.
Oklahoma Fish.
Res. Lab. Rep. 55, Norman.
82 pp.
Gammon, J.
R.
1973.
The effect of thermal input on the populations of fish
and macroinvertebrates in the Wabash River.
Purdue Univ. Water Resour.
Res. Center, Lafayette, Indiana.
Tech. Rep. 32.
106 pp.
Giudice, J.
1964.
Production and comparative growth of three hybrids.
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc. Game and Fish Commissioners 18:512-517.
Harlan, J. R., and E. B. Speaker.
1956.
Iowa fish and fishing.
Iowa Conserv.
Comm.
377 pp.
Heard,
W.
R.
1958.
Studies
in
the
genus Ictiobus
(buffalofishes).
M.S.
Thesis, Oklahoma State Univ., Stillwater.
67 pp.
Hollander,
E.
E.
1974.
Effects of
salinity
on
survival
of
buffalo
fish,
Ictiobus
spp.,
eggs through yearlings.
M.
S. Thesis,
Louisiana State
Univ., Baton Rouge.
22 pp.
Hubbs,
C.
L.,
and K.
L. Lagler.
1947.
Fishes of the Great
Lakes
Region.
Univ. Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
213 pp.
Huet, M.
1970.
Textbook of fish culture:
Breeding and cultivation of fish.
Fishing News (Books) Ltd., London.
436 pp.
Huntington, E. H., and A. W. Hill.
1956.
Population study of fish in Elephant
Butte Lake, 1955. New Mexico Dept. Game Fish, Proj. F-ll-R-1 (Job B-1).
60 pp.
Jenkins, R. M.
1953.
Growth histories of the principal fishes in Grand Lake
('0
the
Cherokees),
Oklahoma,
through
thirteen
years
of
impoundment.
Oklahoma Fish. Res. Lab. Rep.34:1-87.
____________ .
1967.
The influence of some environmental factors on standing
crop and harvest of fishes
in U.S. reservoirs.
In:
Reservoir Fishery
Resources Symposium, Univ. of GA; Athens, April 5-7, 1967; 569 pp.
1976.
Prediction of fish production in Oklahoma Reservoirs
on
the
basis
of
environmental
variables.
Ann.
Okla.
Acad.
Sci.
1976(5):11-20.
Jester,
D.
B.
1971.
Effects of commercial
fishing,
species introductions,
and drawdown control on fish populations in Elephant Butte Reservoir, New
Mexico.
Pages 265-285
in
G.
E.
Hall,
ed.
Reservoir
fisheries
and
limnology.
Am. Fish. Soc.:Spec. Publ. 8.
.
1973.
Life history, ecology, and management of the smallmouth
----,---:-:---:;--
buffalo, Ictiobus bubalus (Rafinesque), with reference to Elephant Butte
Lake, New Mexico.
New Mexico Agric. Exp. Sta. Res. Rep. 261.
111 pp.
27


Jester,
D.
B.,
T.
M.
Moody,
C.
Sanchez,
Jr.,
and
D.
E. Jennings.
1969.
Statewide fisheries
investigations.
A study of
game fish
reproduction
and
rough
fish
problems
in
Elephant Butte Lake.
New Mexico Dept.
Game
Fish, Proj. F-22-R-9 (Job F-1).
73 pp.
Johnson, R. P.
1963.
Studies on the life history and ecology of the bigmouth
buffalo,
Ictiobus
cyprinellus
(Valenciennes).
Jour.
Fish.
Res.
Board
Can. 20(6):1397-1429.
Johnson, D. W., and W.
L. Minckley.
1969.
Natural
hybridization in buffalo-
fishes, genus Ictiobus.
Copeia 1969:198-200.
1972.
1972(1):12-17.
Variability
in
Arizona
buffalofishes.
Copeia
Kallemeyn, L. W., and J.
F. Novotny.
1977.
Fish and fish food organisms in
vari ous
habi tats of the
Mi ssouri
Ri ver
in
South
Dakota,
Nebraska,
and
Iowa.
U.S.D.I. Fish and Wildl. Serv., FWS/OBS-77/25.
100 pp.
Kaur,
K.,
and H.
S. Toor.
1978.
Effect of dissolved oxygen on the survival
and hatching of eggs of scale carp.
Prog. Fish-Cult. 40(1):35-37.
Kozel,
D. J.
1974.
The utilization of select habitats by immature and adult
fishes
in
the
unchannelized Missouri
River.
M.A.
Thesis,
Univ.
South
Dakota, Vermillion.
71 pp.
Martin,
R.
E.
1963.
Growth and
movement
of
smallmouth buffalo,
Ictiobus
bubalus (Rafinesque) in Watts Bar Reservoir, Tennessee.
Ph.D.
Disserta-
tion, Univ. Tennessee, Knoxville.
98 pp.
Martin,
R. E., S.
I. Auerbach,
and D. J.
Nelson.
1964.
Growth and movement
of
smallmouth
buffalo,
Ictiobus
bubalus
(Rafinesque)
in
Watts
Bar
Reservoir, Tennessee.
Oak Ridge Natl. Lab., ORNL-3530, UC-48-Biology and
Medicine.
100 pp.
McComish,
T.
S.
1964.
Food habits of
bigmouth
and
smallmouth
buffalo
in
Lewis and Clark Lake and the Missouri
River.
M.S. Thesis.
South Dakota
State College, Brookings.
21 pp.
•
1967.
Food habits of bigmouth and smallmouth buffalo in
Lewis
and Clark Lake and the Mis·souri River.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 96(1):70-
74.
Minckley,
W.
L.
1959.
Fishes of the Big Blue
River basin,
Kansas.
Univ.
Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist. Publ. 11(7):401-442.
Minckley,
W.
L., J.
E. Johnson,
J.
N.
Rinne,
and
S.
E. Willoughby.
1970.
Foods of buffalofishes,
genus
Ictiobus,
in
central
Arizona
reservoirs.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 99(2):333-342.
28


Moody, T.
M.
1970.
Effects of commercial fishing on the population of small-
mouth buffalo, Ictiobus bubalus (Rafinesque), in Elephant Butte Lake,
New
Mexico.
M.S. Thesis, New Mexico State Univ., Las Cruces.
29 pp.
Padilla, R.
1972.
Reproduction of carp,
smallmouth buffalo,
and
river carp-
sucker in
Elephant Butte
Lake.
M.S.
Thesis,
New Mexico State Univ.,
Las
Cruces.
66 pp.
Perry,
K.
R.
1970.
The distribution
and
food
habits
of
bottom
fishes
in
Tuttle
Creek
Reservoir.
M.S.
Thesis,
Kansas
State
Univ.,
Manhattan.
85 pp.
Pflieger,
W.
L.
1975.
The
fishes
of Missouri.
Missouri
Dept.
of
Conserv.
343 pp.
Shields,
J.
T.
1957.
Report of fisheries
investigations during the fourth
year of impoundment of Fort Randall
Reservoir,
South Dakota,
1956.
S.D.
Dept. Game Fish Parks Dingell-Johnson Proj. F-I-R-6:1-60.
Smith,
W.
1979.
The
fishes
of
Illinois.
Univ.
Illinois
Press,
Chicago.
313 pp.
Stroud,
R.
H.
1967.
Water
quality
criteria
to
protect
aquatic
life:
A
summary. Am. Fish. Soc. Spec. Publ. 4:33-37.
Tafanelli,
R.,
P.
E.
Mauck,
and
G.
Mensinger.
1970.
Food
habits
of
the
bigmouth
and
smallmouth
buffalo
from
four
Oklahoma
reservoirs.
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc. Game and Fish Comm.
pp. 649-658.
Tatarko,
K.
1.
1970.
Sensitivity of
the
pond
carp
to
high temperature at
early stages of embryonal development.
Gidro. Zhurn. 6(2):85-88.
Trautman,
M. D.
1957.
The fishes of Ohio.
Ohio State Univ.
Press,
Columbus.
683 pp.
Walburg,
C.
H.
1976.
Changes in the fish population of Lewis and Clark Lake,
1956-74,
and
their
relation
to
water
management
and
the
environment.
U.S.D.I. Fish and Wildl. Servo
Res. Rep.
79.
34 pp.
Walburg,
C.
H.,
and
W.
R.
Nelson.
1966.
Carp,
river carpsucker,
smallmouth
buffalo,
and bigmouth buffalo in
Lewis
and
Clark
Lake,
Missouri
River.
U.S.D.I. Fish and Wildl. Servo Res. Rep.
69.
30 pp.
Walker,
M.
C.,
and
P.
T.
Frank.
1952.
The
propagation
of buffalo.
Prog.
Fish-Cult. 14(3):129-130.
Willis,
D.
W.
abundance
Sakakawea,
39 pp.
1978.
Investigations
of
population
structure
and
relative
of
year-classes
of
buffalo
fishes,
lctiobus
spp.,
in
Lake
North Dakota.
M.S.
Thesis,
Univ.
North
Dakota,
Grand
Forks.
29


Willis,
D.
W.,
and J.
B.
Owen.
1978.
Decline of year class
strength of
buffalo fishes in Lake Sakakawea, North Dakota.
Prairie Nat. 10(3):89-91.
Wrenn, W.
B.
1968.
Life history aspects of smallmouth buffalo and freshwater
drum
in Wheeler Reservoir, Alabama.
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc.
Game and
Fish Comm. 22:479-495.
30


50212 -, 01
REPORT DOCUMENTATION i 1. REPORT NO.
PAGE
\" -
FWS/OBS-82/1 0.13
12.i
J. Recipient's Acceulon No.
4. TItle and Subtitle
t Habitat Suitability Index Models:
Smallmouth buffalo
7. Author(s)
Elizabeth A. Edwards and Katie Twomey
5. ReDOrt Oate
July 1982
I. PerlO""in. 0raanizatlon Reot. No.
(C)
(G)
11. Contract(C) or Grant(G) No.
9. Perlo"";n. O..anintion Name and Address
Habl tat Eva1 uatfons Procedures ~(lrou1
10. Project/Task/Worle Unit No.
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, Colorado
80526
12. Soonsorin.O..anizatlon Nameand Addr..s
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washinaton.
DC
20240
15. Supplementary Not..
11. Abstract (Umit: 200 words)
13. TYDe of ReDOrt & Period Covered
14.
This is one of a series of publications that provide information on the habitat
requirements of selected fish and wildlife species.
Literature describing the
relationship between habitat variables related to life requisites and habitat
suitability for the Smallmouth buffalo (Ictiobus buba1us) are synthesized.
These
~ data are subsequently used to develop Habitat Suitability (HSI) models.
The HSI
,
models are designed to provide information that can be used in impact assessment
and habitat management.
~ U.S. Government Printing Office 1982 - 580-615/415 Reg. 8
17. Oocument Anelysis
a.
Oescripto~
Animal behavior
Animal ecology
Fishes
Habi tabi 1i ty
b.
Identifiers/QI)en·Ended Terms
Sma11mouth buffalo
Ictiobus buba1us
Habitat suitability
Habitat preference
Habitat management
c. COSAT' Field/Group
,. Availability Statement
Un1 imi ted
See ANSI-Z39.1S)
Mathematical models
Habitat Suitability Index models
Habitat requirements
Species-habitat relationships
Impact assessment
. 19, Security Cia.. (This Reoort)
UNCLASSIFIED
20. Security Class (This Pale)
UNCLASSI FI Fn
See InstructIons on Reverse
21. No. of Da...
ii-v + 28 JllL
22. Price
OPTIONAL FORM Z7Z (~77)
(Formerly NTl5-3S)
Deoartment of Commerca


•
••• ..__
.... J~.
' .
'· 0 ,,-
Hawaiian Islands
(>
-(:(
Headq uarters . Division of Biological
Services, Wasnington, DC
x
Eastern Energy anO Land Use Team
Leetown , WV
*
Nationa l Coastal Ecosystems Team
Slidell, LA
•
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Ft. Coll ins. CO
•
Locat ions of Regional Off ices
REGION 1
Regional Director
U,S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Lloyd Five Hundred Building, Suite 1692
500 N.E. Multnomah Street
Portland , Oregon 97232
REGION 4
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Richard B. Russell Building
75 Spring Street , S.W.
Atlanta, Georgia 30303
I
J- - - -
---
6 1r-- - - ~ -
L,
J
I
:
- ~- --
I
I
1- - -'
I
Il,_
I 2
,,-~- -
-_.J
REGION 2
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
P.O. Box 1306
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87 103
REGION 5
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
One Gateway Center
Newton Corner, Massachusetts 02158
REGION 7
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
lOll E. Tudor Road
Anchorage, Alaska 99503
- ..~,.
REGION 3
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and WildlifeService
Federal Building, Fort Snelling
Twin Cities, Minnesota 551 J I
REGION 6
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
P.O. Box 25486
Denver Federal Center
Denver, Colorado 80225


u.s.
FISH .. WILDLIFE
f>ERVICE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR hi?]
u.s.FISH ANDWILDLIFESERVICE
~
"'-r rw T " "
As the Nation's pri ncipal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has respon-
sibility for most of our ,nationally owned public lands and natural resources . This includes
fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources, protecting our fish and wildlife,
preserving th & environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The Department as-
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to assure that t heir development is in
the best interests of all our people. The Department also has a major respons ibility for
American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. adm inist ration.
