--- 
source: 2008 gfpr12742.pdf
--- 

RIVER OTTER AVOIDANCE 
TECHNIQUES 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
To view a river otter in South Dakota is a unique opportunity for many residents and visitors.  This 
species, although once historically found throughout the state, is now state protected as threatened.  
Historically, unregulated trapping pressure and more recently, habitat loss and degradation have led to 
sharp declines in river otter populations.    
Otters typically inhabit freshwater streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, and other wetlands with abundant prey 
(primarily fish such as carp and sucker) and adequate cover (shoreline vegetation), limited disturbance, and 
good water quality.   
OTTER SIGN 
River otters weigh from 10 to 25 lbs and are 35-50 inches 
long from head to tail.  Look for sign often left by this 
brown, slender, torpedo-shaped species that indicates their 
presence. Sign includes tracks, slides, and scat piles.  
Tracks are similar to mink, only larger (2-3” wide) with 
track pairs often side-by-side.  Watch for slides on bank 
sides; they are best observed in snow.  Scat is dark and 
often concentrated in piles (latrine sites) near regular 
landings where otter leave the water.  Otter scat may be 
further identified by the presence of fish scales and bones 
and crayfish parts. 
2” to 3”


TECHNIQUES 
Beaver-modified wetlands provide excellent otter habitat.  Special techniques should be used to trap for 
beaver (or other furbearers) when otter are present. To avoid incidentally trapping otter, locate sets away 
from trails established by beaver, particularly the trail over a beaver dam.  Otter often use abandoned 
beaver lodges and bank dens, so avoid these areas when trapping for beaver.   
 
BODY-GRIPPING TRAPS 
Otter are most frequently incidentally caught in 10 inch 
(#330) body-gripping traps.  The set of this trap can be 
modified to reduce incidental otter catches by securing 
the trap deep underwater (at least 2½-3’ deep).  Float 
an item over the top of your set (e.g. dive pole, stick or 
log; shown below in cross-section).  Typically, when 
the beaver encounters the floating item, it will dive 
down to the bottom to avoid it and consequently 
spring the trap.  An otter will merely duck under the 
obstacle and pass over the trap.  
 
Straightening, shortening (to 4-5”), and shifting the 
trigger wires of the #330 body grip to either side of 
the trap jaws will allow an otter to pass through 
while still setting an effective trap for beaver.  This 
allows for the agile otter to slip through while the 
larger, more cumbersome beaver trips the trigger.   
 
 
 
 
SNARES, FOOTHOLD TRAPS & LURES 
Snares properly set for beaver are the least likely to capture otter.  Set your snare loop diameter to 9-11”.  
This is part of a properly set beaver snare and will allow otter to pass through.  Add a stop to the snare 
that prevents the loop diameter from closing less than six inches to reduce chances of catching otter.  
Foothold traps set in deep water are less likely to catch otter.  
Beaver are drawn to lure and visual attractors (e.g. castor mounds, peeled sticks and/or other beaver food 
lures).  Otter are rarely attracted to beaver sign or odors.  Use beaver lures to draw beaver away from trails 
used by otter.    


REPORTS 
IF YOU CATCH AN OTTER 
While all South Dakota trappers should avoid catching otter, it may occur.  If this species is caught in a 
trap or snare, release it alive without causing injury to yourself or the otter.  Reports of incidentally caught 
live otter should be submitted via phone, e-mail, or mail.  Knowing the location of incidentally caught 
otter helps to monitor the distribution of otters in the state.  If the animal is dead, leave it undisturbed and 
contact a Department of Game, Fish & Parks representative within 12 hours.  Important management 
information (reproductive status, age, and health) is collected from carcasses.   
 
OBSERVING OTTER   
If you simply observe a live otter, record 
basic information:  date, location (Township, 
Range, Section or GIS coordinates), general 
habitat, behavior and why you think it is an 
otter.  The location at which an otter is 
observed is used to help monitor the 
distribution of otters in the state. Reports can 
be submitted via phone, e-mail, or mail.  
Please include your contact information.   
CONTACT INFORMATION   
Please provide reports of otter in South Dakota to a Department of Game, Fish & Parks regional wildlife 
program manager or Natural Heritage Program (NHP) staff.  The NHP is a member of a network of 
biological inventories known as NatureServe; the NHP is sponsored by the Department of Game, Fish & 
Parks.    
Chamberlain 
   605-734-4530; 1550 E. King Ave. 
Pierre (NHP) 
 605-773-2742; 523 East Capitol Ave 
Rapid City 
  605-394-2391; 3305 W. South Street 
Sioux Falls 
  605-362-2700; 4500 S. Oxbow Ave 
Watertown 
   605-882-5200; 400 West Kemp 
 
 
Cover photograph used courtesy of Trailwood Films and Media.  Sketches used courtesy of Ohio and Wisconsin 
Departments of Natural Resources and Ohio state and Wisconsin Trapper’s Associations. 
