--- 
source: 2008-22.pdf
--- 

Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: True’s beaked whale: Fr - Baleine à bec de True; Sp - Zifio de True.
Fig. 253 Mesoplodon mirus
Distinctive Characteristics: 
True’s beaked
whales are not known to differ substantially from
other species of Mesoplodon, although they have
a slightly bulging forehead and prominent beak.
These beaked whales are characterized by the
position of the mandibular teeth at the very tip of
the lower jaw. The teeth are oval in cross-section,
lean forward, and are visible outside the closed
mouth of adult males.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
lLATERAL VIEWl
Fig. 254 Skull
ZIPH Mes 9       BTW
Mesoplodon mirus True, 1913
106
click for previous page


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae
107
Can be confused with: At sea, True’s beaked whales are difficult to distinguish from other species of
Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90). The only other species in which males have oval teeth at the tip of the lower
jaw is Longman’s beaked whale (p. 112); whose appearance is not known.
Size: Both sexes are known to reach lengths of slightly over 5 m. Weights of up to 1 400 kg have been
recorded. Newborns are probably between 2 and 2.5 m.
Geographical Distribution: True’s beaked whales are known only from strandings in Great Britain, from
Florida to Nova Scotia in the North Atlantic, and from southeast Africa and southern Australia in the
Indo-Pacificc Ocean.
Biology and Behaviour: There is almost no information available on the natural history of this species of
beaked whale. Stranded animals have had squid in their stomachs.
Exploitation: An individual of this species was taken off Nova Scotia in 1938, but no other exploitation is
known.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 255


108
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Strap-toothed whale; Fr - Baleine à bec de Layard; Sp - Zifio de Layard.
Distinctive Characteristics: Although the body
shape of this whale is rather undistinctive, the
teeth of adult males are unique. The long tusks
emerge from near the middle of the lower jaw and
curl backward and inward, extending over the
upper jaw, often preventing it from opening more
than a few centimetres. How the animals eat with
such an arrangement is unknown.
The complex-colour pattern is better-known than
that of most species of Mesoplodon, as this spe-
cies is known from more specimens than any other
in the genus. The body is mostly grey or black,
sometimes with a purple or brown tinge. Much of
the underside is white: around the urogenital
opening, between the flippers, on the beak, and in
a band of variable width around the head. Variable
white or light grey patches tend to be found on the
back and sides.
Fig. 256 Mesoplodon layardii
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 257 Skull
Mesoplodon layardii (Gray, 1865)
ZIPH Mes 10       TSW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae
109
Can be confused with: The unique tusks of adult males of this species will make them identifiable, if seen.
Females and subadults will likely be impossible to distinguish from other Mesoplodon species (starting on
p. 90).
Size: Adult females reach lengths of at least 6.2 m and males reach 5.9 m, making this the largest species
of Mesoplodon. Length at birth is unknown, but is probably close to 3 m.
Geographical Distribution: Strap-toothed whales may have a continuous distribution in cold temperate
waters of the Southern Hemisphere: there have been strandings in South Africa, Australia, Tasmania, New
Zealand, Tierra del Fuego, Uruguay, and the Falkland Islands.
Biology and Behaviour: Groups of up to 3 individuals have been seen. These animals are difficult to
approach. Strap-toothed whales are commonly stranded, but little has been learned from the few sightings
of live animals. They eat squid, and the single stomach examined also contained a piece of algae. Calving
appears to occur in spring to summer.
Exploitation: No exploitation of this species has been reported.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 258


110 
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Andrews’ beaked whale; Fr - Baleine à bec de Bowdoin; Sp - Zifio de Andrews.
Fig. 259 Mesoplodon bowdoini
Distinctive Characteristics: The external ap-
pearance of Andrews’ beaked whale is poorly
known; however, its skeleton is similar to that of
Hubbs’ beaked whale. Adult males are all dark,
except for the front half of the beak, which is white.
The flattened tusks of males of this species
emerge from the middle of the lower jaw on raised
sockets, and protrude above the upper jaw.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 260 Skull
Mesoplodon bowdoini Andrews, 1908
ZIPH Mes 11       BDW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae
111
Can be confused with: The teeth of bulls, if seen well, will allow Andrews' beaked whale to be distinguished
from most other Mesoplodon  species (starting on p. 90). They are most likely to be mistaken for Blainville’s
beaked whale (p. 90) but lack the arched lower jaw.
Size: Females reach at least 4.6 m in length and males reach 4.7 m. Length at birth is presumed to be
about 2 m.
Geographical Distribution: To date, Andrews’ beaked whale is known only from the South Pacific and
Indian oceans. Strandings have occurred in Australia, New Zealand, Tasmania, and the Kerguelen Islands.
20º 0º 
20º 40º 60º 80º 
100º 120º 140º 160º 180º 160º 140º 120º 100º 80º 60º 40º 
20º
* Possibly extralimital record
Fig. 261
Biology and Behaviour: Essentially nothing is known of the biology of this species, other than the few facts
that have been gleaned from stranded individuals.
Exploitation: No exploitation of this species is known.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known. 


112 
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Longman’s beaked whale; Fr - Baleine à bec de Longman; Sp - Zifio de Longman.
Fig. 262 Mesoplodon pacificuss(body shape and coloration are unknown for this species)
Distinctive Characteristics: Nothing is known of
the external appearance of Longman’s beaked
whale, as it is known only from 2 damaged skulls.
The teeth of adult males are oval in cross-section,
are located at the tip of the lower jaw, and point
forward.
DORSAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Fig. 263 Skull
Mesoplodon pacificus Longman, 1926
ZIPH Mes 12       BNW


Can be confused with: Until a fresh carcass is examined, Longman’s beaked whales cannot be positively
identified (except from examination of the skull). In shape and position, the teeth most closely resemble
those of True’s beaked whales (p. 106).
113
Size: The size of Longman’s beaked whale is unknown, but based on the size of a skull it is thought to reach
lengths of over 6 m.
Geographical Distribution: The distribution of Longman’s beaked whale is incompletely known, but it may
be limited to the Indo-Pacific region. The 2 available skulls are from Australia and Somalia.
Biology and Behaviour: Although Longman’s beaked whale is here classified in the genus Mesoplodon,
some researchers believe it belongs in its own genus, Indopacetus. It qualifies as the most poorly known of
all the marine mammals.
Exploitation: There is no known exploitation of this species.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 264
* Record
Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae


114
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Stejneger’s beaked whale; Fr - Baleine à bec de Stejneger; Sp - Zifio de Stejneger.
Fig. 265 Mesoplodon stejnegeri
Distinctive Characteristics: Stejneger’s beaked
whale has the characteristic Mesoplodon body
shape. Apparently, both sexes are uniformly grey
to black, often with extensive scarring in bulls.
The flattened tusks of males are situated near the
middle of the lower jaw, and point forward. They
are located on raised prominences, so that the
crowns extend above the rostrum.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 266 Skull
Mesoplodon stejnegeri True, 1885
ZIPH Mes 13       BTW


Can be confused with: Adult males will be distinguishable from most other Mesoplodon species (starting
on p. 90) by tooth shape and position. Within Stejneger’s beaked whale’s range, both Hubbs’ (p. 98) and
Blainville’s (p. 90) beaked whale males have similar teeth.
Size: Both sexes reach lengths of at least 5.3 m. Newborns are assumed to be between 2 and 2.5 m in
length.
Geographical Distribution: Stejneger’s beaked whales are found in continental slope and oceanic waters
of the North Pacific Basin, from southern California, north to the Bering Sea, and south to the Sea of Japan.
This appears to be primarily a cold temperate and subarctic species. It is most commonly stranded in Alaska,
especially along the Aleutian Islands.
Biology and Behaviour: Groups of 5 to 15 individuals have been observed, often containing animals of-
mixed sizes. Stejneger’s beaked whales are known to feed on squid.
Exploitation: Several Stejneger’s beaked whales are known to have been taken in salmon driftnets off
Japan, and there have probably been occasional direct catches of this species off Japan and possibly
elsewhere.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae 
115
Fig. 267


116 
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Mesoplodon species “A.”
Fig. 268 Mesoplodon sp. (unidentified)
Distinctive Characteristics: An unidentified whale of the genus, referred to as Mesoplodon species ‘A,”
has been described from the eastern tropical Pacific, based on many sightings at sea. Two morphs exist, a
scarred black and white form that is easily identified in the field (presumably adult males), and a smaller
uniformly brown one (probably females and subadults). These animals have moderately long beaks, and
low triangular dorsal fins with slightly falcate or straight trailing edges. They do not match with descriptions
of any known whale, and may represent an undescribed species.
Mesoplodon sp. (unidentified)


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae
117
Can be confused with: Adult males may be distinguishable by the presence of a broad swathe that runs
from the head and down the sides, on the otherwise black body. Females and immatures are not readily
distinguishable from other species of Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90).
Size: Maximum length estimates for these animals are about 5.5 m.
Geographical Distribution: Mesoplodon species “A” is the most frequently sighted Mesoplodon whale in
the offshore eastern tropical Pacific, and may be endemic to these waters.
Fig. 269
Biology and Behaviour: Most groups have been of 2 animals, but have ranged up to 4. The behaviour of
these animals appears to be similar to that of other species of mesplodonts, but during a sighting of a single
male in the eastern tropical Pacific, the animal breached 3 times.
Exploitation: This animal is known only from sightings at sea, and no human exploitation is known.
IUCN Status: Not listed. 
click for next page
