--- 
source: 2008-4.pdf
--- 

20 
Marine Mammals of the World
24i.
24j.
24k.
24l.
White areas in head and neck area; 2 large flattened tusks at top of arch in lower jaw of
adult males (protruding above upper jaw when mouth closed); known only from North
Pacific Ocean, apparently most common  in subarctic waters of Alaska (females and
subadults require museum preparation for identification) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Stejneger’s beaked whale (Mesoplodon stejnegeri) p. 114
Adult males with white jaws and tusks on slightly raised prominences in middle of jaw;
known only from Australia, New Zealand, and Kerguelen Island (females and subadults
require museum preparation for identification) 
. . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .   .  . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Andrews’ beaked whale (Mesoplodon bowdoini) p. 110
Complex pattern of black, white, and grey; adult males with pair of tusks that grow outside
of mouth from lower jaw, and wrap around upper jaw, preventing it from opening more
than a few centimetres; known only from Southern Hemisphere (females and subadults
require museum preparation for identification) 
. . . . . .  .  .   .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Strap-toothed whale (Mesoplodon layardii) p. 108
Grey with lighter sides and belly; teeth of adult males protrude outside mouth in middle
of lower jaw; vestigial teeth sometimes present in both jaws; known only from the
temperate and subarctic North Atlantic (females and subadults require museum prepa-
ration for identification) 
. .  .  . . . . . . . . . Sowerby’s beaked whale (Mesoplodon bidens) p. 102
24m. Black with white swathe running from head down sides, or brown in colour; head flat;
moderately long beak; trailing edge of dorsal fin nearly straight; known only from eastern
tropical Pacific. . . . . .   .   .   .   .  .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mesoplodon sp. “A” (unidentified) p. 116
25a. Teeth blunt with expanded crowns, laterally compressed, and relatively small; beak
extremely 
short 
or 
nonexistent 
(Fig. 
52) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Porpoise) 
+ 26
25b. Teeth conical and sharply pointed, unless heavily worn (in cross-section, circular or oval);
beak 
usually 
present 
(Fig. 
53) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Dolphin or small toothed whale) + 31
teeth blunt with 
teeth conical and
Fig. 52 Porpoise 
Fig. 53 Dolphin
26a.
26b.
No dorsal fin; narrow dorsal ridge; body dark grey or black, with lighter belly; 13 to 22
teeth in each  tooth row; maximum size to 2 m; distribution limited to the Indo-Pacific area
(Fig. 54). . .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Finless porpoise (Neophocaena phocaenoides) p. 192
Dorsal fin present (Fig. 55) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  . -+ 
27
no dorsal fin
Fig. 54 Neophocaena phocaenoides 
Fig. 55 Porpoise
dorsal fin present
mandible
sharply pointed
expanded crowns
mandible
click for previous page


27a.
27b.
28a.
28b.
29a.
29b.
Dorsal fin set far back  on body, rising at a shallow angle from back,  with long leading
edge and convex trailing edge; body dark charcoal grey to black; ll to 16 pairs of teeth
in upper jaw, 16 to 19 in lower; maximum size to 2 m; distribution limited to coastal South
America 
(Fig. 
56). . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. Burmeister’s porpoise (Phocoena spinipinnis) p. 188
Dorsal 
fin 
upright 
and 
set 
near 
middle of back . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +  28
dorsal fin set far
back on body
/
Fig. 56 Phocoena spinipinnis
Dorsal fin tall and slightly falcate; body grey to brownish grey, with light belly, dark lip
patches, and eye rings; flippers large; 16 to 22 teeth per side of each jaw; maximum size
1.7 m; distribution limited to the Gulf of California, Mexico (Fig. 57). . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Vaquita (Phocoena sinus) p. 190
Triangular dorsal fin; found outside the Gulf of California 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 29
dorsal fin tall and
Fig. 57 Phocoena sinus
Body dark grey on back to white below; dark stripe from gape to flipper; short, triangular,
wide-based  dorsal fin; 22 to 28 pairs of teeth in upper jaw, 21 to 25 in lower; maximum
size to about 2 m; Northern Hemisphere distribution only (Fig. 58) . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Harbour porpoise (Phocoena phocoena) p. 186
Colour 
pattern 
sharply 
demarcated 
black 
and 
white 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 30
_ short, triangular wide-
based dorsal fin
dark stripe from gape to flipper
Fig. 58 Phocoena phocoena
cetacea 
21
slightly falcate


22 
Marine Mammals of the World
30a.
30b.
Black body with striking large white patch on sides and beily; extremely robust, with small
head and appendages; deepened caudal peduncle; dorsal fin triangular, with recutved
tip; white or light grey trim on dorsal fin and flukes; 23 to 28 pairs of extremely small
teeth per jaw; maximum size to 2.4 m; North Pacific distribution only (Fig. 59) 
. . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . 
Dall’s porpoise (Phocoenoides dalli)  p. 182
Body bicoloured, biack on dorsal haif and white on ventral haif; black lips; white
“spectacle” surrounding eye; dorsal fin triangular; 17 to 23 pairs of teeth in upper jaw, 16
to 20 in lower; maximum size to about 2.2 m; distributed oniy around southern South
America and offshore islands of the Southern Hemisphere (Fig. 60) . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Spectacled porpoise (Australophocaena dioptrica) p. 184
large white patch 
white ‘spectacle”
31a.
31b.
32a.
32b.
Fig. 59 Phocoenoides dalli 
Fig. 60 Australophocaena dioptrica
No dorsal fin or prominent dorsal ridge (there may be a slight dorsal ridge) (Figs 61
and 62) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .32
Dorsal fin or prominent dorsal ridge present (Figs 67 and 68) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _) 35
Siight dorsal ridge present, sometimes marked with nicks or cuts; body robust; jaws short
and wide; forehead high and giobose; fiippers short, broad, and rounded; distribution
limited to arctic and subarctic areas (Fig. 61) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(Monodontid) + 33
No dorsal ridge present; body extremely slender; small fiippers and flukes; beak short
but 
distinct 
(Fig. 
62) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(Right 
whale 
dolphin)
+ 34
forehead high
Fig. 61 Monodontid
no dorsal ridgel
body extremely slender
Fig. 62 Right whale dolphin
slight dorsal ridge
and globose


Cetacea 
23
33a.
33b.
Body grey to brownish grey, mottled; short flippers often upturned at tips; flukes with more
or less convex trailing edge; only 2 teeth in upper jaw, unerupted except in adult males,
in which the left tooth develops into a left-spiraled tusk up to 3 m long; maximum size up
to 5 m (excluding tusk); distribution limited to high Arctic (Fig. 63) . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . 
Narwhal (Monodon monoceros)  p. 74
Body white to dark grey; extremely stocky; melon bulbous; beak short; head and
appendages small; “meck” often visible; 9 pairs of teeth in upper jaw, 8 in Iower; maximum
size 
5.5 
m 
(Fig. 
64) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . White whale (Delphinapterus leucas) p. 76
body mottled
body colour  uniform
tusk in adult
males
convex trailing edge
Fig. 63 Monodon monoceros  
Fig. 64 Delphinapterus leucas
34a. Body black with white lanceolate pattern on belly; 37 to 54 fine pointed teeth per side of
each jaw; maximum body length 3.1 m; North Pacific distribution only (Fig. 65) . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Northern right whale dolphin (Lissodelphis borealis) p. 170
34b. Body black above and white below; flippers, beak, and forehead mostly white; 44 to 49
teeth in each tooth row; maximum size to 3 m; Southern Hemisphere distribution only
(Fig. 
66). 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Southern right whale dolphin (Lissodelphis peronii) p. 172
Fig. 65 Lissodelphis borealis 
Fig. 66 Lissodelphis peronii
35a. Jaws extremely long; flippers broad and more or less triangular; eyes small; low,
broad-based dorsal fin or dorsal ridge; distributed in rivers and lakes, only rarely in
estuaries 
(Fig. 
67) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  . 
(River dolphin)
36
35b. Prominent dorsal fin; distribution estuarine or marine (Fig. 68) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 39
broad-based  dorsal fin
/
prominent dorsal fin
I
Fig. 67 River dolphin 
Fig. 68


24
Marine Mammals of the World
36a.
36b.
Blowhole transverse and crescentic; body grey with pinkish cast; dorsal hump low and
set two-thirds of the way from the snout tip; forehead steep; 23 to 35 teeth per tooth row;
maximum size to 2.6 m; distribution limited to Amazon and Orinoco drainage basins of
Brazil, Bolivia, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, and Venezuela (Fig. 69). . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Boto (Inia geoffrensis) p. 198
Blowhole 
longitudinal 
(Figs 
70 
and 
71) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 37
blowhole transverse and
crescentic
I
37a.
37b.
Fig. 69 Inia geoffrensis
Body bluìsh grey above and white below; blowhole oval; beak upturned at tip; dorsal fin
triangular with blunt tip; 31 to 38 teeth per tooth row; maximum size to 2.6 m; distribution
limited to the Yangtze River of China (Fig. 70) . . . . . . . . . . . Baiji (Lipotes vexillifer) p. 200
Body grey with lighter or pinkish belly; blowhole slit-like;  eyes extremely small; beak long,
narrow when viewed from above, with interlocking teeth protruding outside closed mouth
at front half; low dorsal ridge; 26 to 39 teeth in each  row; maximum size to 2.5 m (Fig. 71)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(Platanista sp.) 4 38
beak upturned at tip
38a.
36b.
blowhole oval
blowhole slit-like
Fig, 70 Lipotes vexillifer 
Fig. 71 Platanista sp.
Distribution limited to the Ganges and Brahmaputra River systems of India, Nepal,
Bangladesh, and Bhutan (Fig. 72) . . . . . Ganges River dolphin (Platanista gangetica) p. 194
Distribution limited to the 
Indus River system of Pakistan . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indus River dolphin (Platanista minor) p. 196
Fig. 72 Ptatanista gangetica


Cetacea 
25
39a.
39b.
40a.
40b.
Body dark grey with lighter belly; prominent triangular dorsal fin with rounded tip; flippers
broad with curved leading edge and serrated trailing edge; eyes small; 51 to 58 teeth per
tooth row; maximum size to 1.8 m; distribution limited to coastal and estuarine waters of
Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil (Fig. 73) . . . . . . .     Franciscana. (Pontoporia blainvillei) p. 202
Flippers without serrated trailing edge; eyes not particularly small . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   
           + 40
Fig. 73 Pontoporia blainvillei
Head blunt with no prominent beak (Fig. 74) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
         
          
   
 
41
Head with prominent beak (Fig. 75) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  
            
             + 52
head blunt
Fig. 74 
Fig. 75
41a. Two to 7 pairs of teeth at front of lower jaw only (rarely 1 to 2 pairs in upper jaw), but teeth
may be absent or extensively worn; forehead blunt with vertical crease; dorsal fin tall and
dark; body grey to white, covered with scratches and splotches in adults; flippers long
and sickle-shaped; maximum body length 4 m (Fig. 76) . Risso’s dolphin (Grampus griseus)  p. 152
41b. Teeth (7 or more pairs) in both upper and lower jaws; forehead without vertical median
crease (Fig.77) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . .
forehead with
forehead without
vertical crease
vertical crease
teeth only at front
teeth in upper
of lower jaw
Fig. 76 Grampus griseus
and lower jaw
Fig. 77
prominent beak
 
42


26
Marine Mammals of the World
42a. Flippers broad and paddle-shaped with rounded tips (Fig. 78) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42b. Flippers long and slender with pointed or blunt tips (Fig. 79) . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .
43a.
43b.
44a.
44b.
-x paddle-shaped flippers
\
long and slender flippers
Fig. 78
Fig. 79
Flippers large and paddle-shaped; dorsal fin tall and erect (up to 0.9 m in females and
1.8 m in males); striking black and white coloration,  with white post-ocular patches, white
lower jaw, white ventrolateral field, and light grey saddle patch behind dorsal fin; 10 to 12
large (to 2.5 cm in diameter) oval teeth in each tooth row; maximum body length 10 m
(Fig.80). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Killer whale (Orcinus orca) p. 120
Dorsal fin low and rounded or triangular: adults less than 3 m; greater than 12 teeth per
toothrow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        
tall dorsal fin
Fig. 80 Orcinus orca
Body grey with lighter belly: dorsal fin small and slightly falcate; neck crease present;
forehead bluff: 15 to 20 teeth per row; maximum size 2.8 m; distribution limited to coastal
areas and rivers of southeast Asia and northern Australia (Fig. 81) . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Irrawaddy dolphin (Orcaella brevirostris) p. 118
More than 22 teeth per tooth row . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  . . (Cephalorhynchus 
sp.) 
45
15-20 teeth per row
Fig. 81 Orcaella brevirostris
43
48
44


Cetacea
27
45a.
45b.
Sides light grey; dark grey cape (very narrow just behind blowhole area); belly white, with
arms that surround the urogenital area and extend up both sides; white throat patch;
white axillary patches; dorsal fin moderately tall and triangular; 22 to 28 teeth in each
row; maximum size 1.7 m; distribution limited to southwest coast of Africa (Fig. 82)
. .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Heaviside’s dolphin (Cephalorhynchus heavisidii) p. 176
Dorsal fin rounded (Fig. 83). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
-+ 
46
dorsal fin triangular
dorsal fin rounded
i
1
46a.
46b.
47a.
47b.
Fig. 82 Cephalorhynchus heavisidii 
Fig. 83
Distinct black and white colour pattern, with black head and flippers, and black from the
dorsal fin to the flukes; white chin patch; black genital patch; 28 to 34 teeth per row;
maximum size 1.8 m; distribution limited to coastal and inshore waters of southeast South
America 
and 
the 
Kerguelen 
Islands 
(Fig. 
84) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Commerson’s dolphin (Cephalorhynchus commersonii) p. 174
Colour pattern largely various shades of grey. .   .  . .  . .  . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
+ 47
distinct black and white
colour pattern
Fig. 84 Cephalorhynchus commersonii
Body mostly grey, with white belly and “arms”  that extend up the sides on the tail stock
(clearly demarcated by a dark grey line), and black dorsal fin, flippers, flukes, face, beak
tip, and blowhole area; 26 to 32 teeth per row; maximum size to 1.7 m; distribution limited
to coast of New Zealand (Fig. 85) 
. . . .   .   Hector’s dolphin (Cephalorhynchus hectori) p. 178
Body grey with clearly demarcated white belly and chin; dark band between the flippers;
white spots in axillae; 29 to 34 teeth in each row; maximum size to 1.7 m; distribution
limited to west coast of South America, especially protected inshore waters of southern
Chile 
(Fig. 
86) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Black dolphin (Cephalorhynchus eutropiu) p. 180
extending “arms”
Fig. 85 Cephalorhynchus hectori
white spots
in axillae
Fig. 86 Cephalorhynchus eutropia


28
Marine Mammals of the World
48a. Dorsal fin low and broad-based, located on forward third of back; head bulbous; body
black to dark grey with light anchar-shaped patch on belly and often light grey saddle
behind dorsal fin; often a light streak above and behind each eye; deepened tail stock;
long sickle-shaped flippers; 7 to 13 pairs of teeth in front half only of each jaw (Fig. 87)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(Pilot whale) + 49
48b. Dorsal fin near middle of back  (Fig. 88). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 50
dorsal fin located on 
 
dorsal fin near
/ fonward 3Rd of back 
middle of back
-
49a.
49b.
Fig. 87 Pilot whale
Fig. 88
Flipper length 18 to 27% of body length, with prominent “elbow”;  8 to 13 teeth in each tooth
row; maximum size to 6.3 m; distribution limited mostly to cold temperate regions of North
Atlantic and Southern Hemisphere (Fig. 89). Long-finned pilot whale (Globicephala melas) p. 122
Flipper length 16 to 22% of body length; 7 to 9 pairs of teeth in each tooth row; maximum
body length 6.1 m; distribution limited to tropical and warm temperate waters (Fig. 90)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Short-finned pilot whale (Globicephala macrorhynchus) p. 124
long flippers
shorter flippers
Fig. 89 Globicephala melas 
Fig. 90 Globicephala macrorhynchus
50a. Flipper with distinct hump on leading edge; body predominantly black; no beak; 7 to 12
large teeth in each  half of both jaws, circular in cross-section; maximum body length 6 m
(Fig. 91) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . False killer whale (Pseudorca crussidens)  p. 126
50b. Body black or dark grey with white lips; white to light grey patch on belly; flipper lacks
hump on leading edge; 8 to 25 teeth in each  tooth row (Fig. 92) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 
51
hump on leading
edge
Fig. 91 Pseudorca crassidens
no hump on
leading edge 
Fig. 92
click for next page
