--- 
source: 2008-20.pdf
--- 

Fig. 172 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: Bryde’s whales can be easily confused with sei whales (p. 54). The presence of 3
head ridges confirms a whale’s identity as a Bryde’s whale (however, be aware that rippling water on the
head of other species can be mistaken for accessory head ridges). Fin (p. 52) and minke (p. 58) whales can
also cause some confusion; size (fin whales are largerand minke whales smaller), head shape, and coloration
differences are the best characteristics to use.
Size: Adults can be up to 15.5 m long: newborns are about 4 m. Maximum weight is about 20 to 25 t. A
smaller form has been described from some areas.
Geographical Distribution: Bryde’s whales are creatures of the tropical and subtropical zones and
generally do not move poleward of 40º in either hemisphere. They are found both offshore and near the
coast in many areas. Whales of this species are not known to make extensive north to south migrations,
though short migrations have been documented. Resident populations may be common in certain areas,
such as the Gulf of California.
* Extralimital record
Fig. 173
Biology and Behaviour: Although generally seen alone or in pairs, Bryde’s whales do aggregate into groups
of 10 to 20 on feeding grounds.
Unlike other rorquals, the tropical Bryde’s whale does not have a well-defined breeding season in most areas,
and births can occur throughout the year.
Bryde’s whales are primarily fish eaters, but they also take invertebrates. They are very active lunge feeders,
often changing direction abruptly when going after mobile fish prey.
Exploitation: The history of whaling for Bryde’s and sei whales is nearly impossible to separate, because
these species were not consistently distinguished until recently. The Bryde’s whale is one of the few great
whales not listed as endangered.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Cetacea - Mysticeti - Balaenopteridae 
57
click for previous page


58
FAO Names: En - Minke whale; Fr - Petit rorqual; Sp - Rorcual enano.
Marine Mammals of the World
Distinctive Characteristics: Minke whales are
generally easy to distinguish from the larger ror-
quals. The head is extremely pointed, viewed
both from the side and from above, and the
median head ridge is prominent. The dorsal fin
is tall, recurved, and located about two-thirds of
the way back from the snout tip. There are 30 to
70 moderately short ventral pleats (often extend-
ing just past the flippers) and 231 to 360 pairs of
white to greyish baleen plates.
The minke’s coloration is distinctive: dark grey
dorsally and white beneath, with streaks or lobes
of intermediate shades on the sides or both.
Some of the streaks may extend onto the back
behind the head. The most distinctive light mark-
ing is a brilliant white band across each flipper of
Northern Hemisphere and some Southern Hemi-
sphere minke whales (the band is not usually
present on Antarctic animals). This band is gen-
erally visible through the water when animals are
near the surface. The blow tends to be diffuse and
is often not visible at all.
Fig. 174 Balaenoptera acutorostrata
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Rg. 175 Skull
Balaenoptera acutorostrata Lacepède, 1804
BALAEN Bal 1 
M I W


Cetacea - Mysticeti - Balaenopteridae 
59
Fig. 176 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: When seen clearly, minkes are probably the easiest to distinguish of the whales of
the genus Balaenoptera, by their small size, usual absence of a visible blow, unique head shape, and
distinctive colour patterns (especially the flipper bands). Sei (p. 54) and Bryde’s whales (p. 56), and some
beaked whales, may present identification problems, but generally only if the animals are seen at a distance.
Size: Adult minke whales reach just over 9 m in length (rarely some females may reach a maximum of
10.7 m). Maximum body weight is about 14 t. Length at birth is 2.4 to 2.8 m.
Geographical Distribution: Minke whales are widely distributed from the tropics to the ice edges in both
hemispheres. Although they can be seen offshore as well, minkes are more often seen in coastal and inshore
areas. Minke whales are very rare in some tropical pelagic areas, such as the eastern tropical Pacific.
Biology and Behaviour: Minke whales sometimes aggregate for feeding in coastal and inshore areas of
cold temperate to polar seas. Although groups elsewhere are generally much smaller (singles, pairs, and
trios), aggregations in the Antarctic may contain hundreds of animals. Minkes do not fluke-up on a dive, but
they do sometimes breach and perform other aerial behaviours.
Calving occurs in low latitude areas (although the migrations of minkes are not as well-defined as those of
larger rorquals) in winter months.
The prey types of minke whales are primarily krill and small schooling fishes.
Exploitation: For, the last 2 decades, the minke whale has been the main target of the Antarctic whaling
fleets. Although the IWC commercial whaling moratorium has afforded all great whales protection, a certain
amount of “scientific whaling” continues and Norway recently resumed commercial whaling for this species.
Japan also took some during recent Antarctic whaling seasons. The minke whale is the most abundant of
all baleen whales.
IUCN Status: lnsufficently known.
Fig. 177


60
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Humpback whale: Fr - Baleine à bosse; Sp - Rorcual jorobado.
Fig. 178 Megaptera novaeangliae
Distinctive Characteristics: The humpback
whale differs substantially from the general rorqual
body plan. The body is more robust; the flippers
are extremely long (up to one-third of the body
length) with a series of bumps, including 2 more
prominent ones in consistent positions on the
leading edge, more-or-less dividing the margin
into thirds. The flukes have a concave, serrated
trailing edge, and the dorsal fin is low and broad-
based (usually sitting on a hump). The head has
a single median ridge, and the anterior portion of
the head is covered with many bumps (each con-
taining a single sensory hair).
The body is black or dark grey dorsally and may
be white ventrally, but the borderline between dark
and light is highly variable and seems to differ by
population (the white extends up onto the sides
and back in some Southern Hemisphere hump-
backs). The flippers are white on the ventral side
and vary from all-white to mostly black on the
dorsal surface. The ventral side of the flukes also
varies from all-black to all-white.
There are 270 to 400 black to olive baleen plates,
and 14 to 35 ventral pleats extending back to the
navel or beyond. The blow is rather low and bushy
for a balaenopterid, reaching only 3 m. It may
sometimes appear V-shaped.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig, 179 Skull
Megaptera novaeangliae (Borowski, 1781)
BALAEN Meg 1
HUW


Cetacea - Mysticeti - Balaenopteridae                                                                                                                             61
Fig. 180 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: At close range, the humpback is one of the easiest whales to identify. At a distance,
however, there can be some confusion with other large whales, especially blue (p. 50) and sperm (p. 68)
whales. When a closer look is obtained, humpbacks are generally unmistakable.
Size: Adult humpback whales are 11 to 16 m long and newborns are 4.5 to 5 m in length. Weights of at
least 35 t are attained by adults.
Geographical Distribution: Humpbacks feed and breed in coastal waters, often near human population
centres, and this helps make them one of the most familiar of the large whales. They migrate from tropics
(breeding areas) to polar or sub-polar regions, reaching the ice edges in both hemispheres (feeding areas);
their migrations take them through oceanic zones.
Fig. 181
  
Biology and Behaviour: Although they generally occur singly or in groups of 2 or 3, larger aggregations
develop in feeding and breeding areas. Humpbacks are probably the most acrobatic of all great whales,
sometimes performing full breaches that bring their entire bulk out of the water. They are adaptable lunge
feeders, which use bubble nets, bubble clouds, tail flicks, and other techniques to help concentrate krill and
small schooling fish for easier feeding. Sometimes humpbacks gather into coordinated groups of up to 20
or more whales, which work together to herd and capture prey. On the breeding grounds, males appear to
compete for access to estrus females, apparently using their now well-known complex songs as part of their
breeding display. Calves are born on wintering grounds in tropical and subtropical regions. Individual
humpback whales can be identified using photographs of the distinctive markings on the undersides of their
flukes. Such photos can be of great help in defining movements and migrations of this and other species.
Exploitation: Humpback whales were not a favorite target of Yankee whalers. However, because of their
relatively slow swimming speeds and coastal habits, they were an early target of modern large-scale
commercial whaling, beginning with shore based whaling in many areas. Since international protection in
1944, most stocks now appear to be stable or on the rise.
IUCN Status: Vulnerable.


62
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Gray whale; Fr - Baleine grise; Sp - Ballena gris.
Fig. 182 Eschrichtius robustus
Distinctive Characteristics: Gray whales are
easy to identify. They are intermediate in robust-
ness between right whales and rorquals. The
upper jaw is moderately arched, and the head is
acutely triangular in top view and slopes sharply
downward in side view. The flippers are broad and
paddle-shaped, with pointed tips. The flukes have
smooth S-shaped trailing edges, with a deep me-
dian notch. There is a dorsal hump about two-
thirds of the way back from the snout tip, followed
by a series of 6 to 12 smaller “knuckles” on the
DORSAL VIEW
dorsal ridge of the tail stock. There may be several
(generally 2 to 5) short, but deep, creases on the
throat that allow compression of the throat during
feeding.
Although young calves are dark charcoal Qrey, all
other gray whales are brownish Qrey to light grey.
They are nearly covered with light blotches and
white to orangish patches of whale lice and barna-
cles, especially on the head and tail. These
patches of ectoparasites are very helpful in distin-
guishing this species.
VENTRAL VIEW
The mouth contains 130 to 180 pairs of yellowish
baleen plates, with very coarse bristles. The blow
is bushy, heart-shaped when viewed from ahead
or behind, and rises less than 3 to 4 m.
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 183 Skull
ESCH Esch 1 
GRW
Eschrichtius robustus (Lilljeborg, 1861)


Cetacea - Mysticeti - Eschrichtiidae  
63
Fig. 184 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: Gray whales are unique in body shape and patterning, and there is usually little
problem with identification. From a distance, however, they can sometimes be confused with right (p. 42),
bowhead (p. 46) sperm (p. 68) or humpback (p. 60) whales.
Size: At birth, gray whales are about 4.5 to 5 m long; adults are 11 to 15 m in length. Maximum body weight
is over 35 t.
Geographical Distribution: Gray whales are found only in the North Pacific Ocean and adjacent seas.
Gray whales are bottom feeders and are thus restricted to shallow continental shelf waters for feeding. In
fact, they are the most coastal of all great whales, living much of their lives within a few tens of kilometres
of shore (although they do feed great distances from shore on the shallow flats of the Bering and Chukchi
seas). Gray whale stocks which previously occurred in the North Atlantic were wiped out by whalers in the
seventeenth or eighteenth century.
Fig. 185
Biology and Behaviour: Most groups are small, often with no more than 3 individuals, but gray whales do
sometimes migrate in pods of up to 16, and larger aggregations are common on the feeding and breeding
grounds. Breaching, spy-hopping, and other aerial behaviours are common, especially during migration,
and in and near the breeding lagoons of Baja California and mainland Mexico. The migration from winter
breeding grounds in Mexico to summer feeding grounds in the Bering, Chukchi, and occasionally Beaufort,
seas is witnessed by tens of thousands of people each year along the west coast of North America.Breeding
occurs in winter, during migration, and in or near the Baja California breeding lagoons. Gray whales feed
primarily on swarming mysids and tube-dwelling amphipods in the northern parts of their range, but are also
known to take red crabs, baitfish, and other food opportunistically.
Exploitation: The North Atlantic stock was apparently wiped-out by whalers in the 18th century. A western
North Pacific (Korean) stock may also have been extirpated in the mid 20th century; its continued existence
as a small remnant is still debated. The eastern North Pacific (California-Chukotka) stock nearly suffered
the same fate twice, once in the late 1800s and again in the early 1900s. Both times, a respite in commercial
whaling allowed the population to recover. About 170 to 200 from this latter stock are killed annually under
special permit by commercial whalers on behalf of Soviet aborigines, and one or a few are taken in some
years by Alaskan Eskimos. Since receiving IWC protection in 1946 and the end of research harvests in the
late 1960s this population has increased, and now apparently equals or exceeds pre-exploitation numbers.
IUCN Status: Not listed.
click for next page
