--- 
source: 2008-32.pdf
--- 

BIOLOGICAL REPORT 82(10.134)
APRIL 1987
LIb
.:
.....~~J rch Center
N'.rary
I
., ,:iU service
.
aUonal Wet ands Research Center . :.lOulevard
, ,U. S. FiSh and WUdUfe Servt~
. L.a. 'Xl 06
700 CaJundome Boulevard
'
Lafayette. La. 70508
GUIDELINES FOR USING THE DELPHI
TECHNIQUE TO DEVELOP HABITAT
SUITABILITY INDEX CURVES
•
Cish and Wildlife Service
SK
~ . S . Department of the Interior
361
.U54
no. 82-
10.134


Biological Report 82(10.134)
April 1987
GUIDELINES FOR USING THE DELPHI TECHNIQUE TO
DEVELOP HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX CURVES
by
Johnie H. Crance
National Ecology Center
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
2627 Redwing Road
Fort Collins,
CO
80526-2899
National Ecology Center
Division of Wildlife and Contaminant Research
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington,
DC
20240


This report should be cited as:
Crance,
J.H.
1987.
Guidelines
for
using
the
Delphi
technique
to
develop
habitat
suitability
index
curves.
U.S.
Fish
Wild1.
Servo
Bio1.
Rep.
82(10.134).
21 pp.


CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
i v
INTRODUCTION
1
GUIDELINES
2
Number of Panel i sts
2
Selection of Panelists...............................................
4
Round 1
4
Round 2
5
Subsequent Rounds
6
Fina1 Report
6
DISCUSSION
6
REFERENCES
9
APPENDICES
A.
Letter mailed to panelists to begin round 1 of a Delphi
exercise conducted to develop SI curves for redbreast sunfish
11
B.
Instructions used by panelists to begin round 1 of a Delphi
exerc i se to deve lop SI curves for redbreast sunfi sh
12
C.
Preliminary definitions of some terms considered by panelists
at the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop
SI curves for redbreast sunfish.................................
13
D.
Table used for soliciting opinions on water velocity
suitability at the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise
to develop SI curves for redbreast sunfi sh
14
E.
Table used for soliciting opinions on water depth suitability
at the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop SI
curves for redbreast sunfish....................................
15
F.
Table used for soliciting opinions on water temperature
suitability at the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise
to develop SI curves for redbreast sunfish
16
G.
Table used for soliciting opinions on substrate suitability at
the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop SI
curves for redbreast sunfish....................................
17
H.
Statement used for querying panelists about cover suitability
at the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop SI
curves for redbreast sunfish....................................
18
I.
A summary of responses to the cover query presented in
Appendix H
19
J.
A summary of first-round estimates of water temperature
suitability for sauger spawning, incubation, and adults
20
K.
An example of
how water temperature criteria for spawning
evolved during a 4-round Delphi exercise to develop SI curves...
21
iii


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The following
reviewers are gratefully acknowledged for
useful
comments
on earlier drafts
of this
paper:
Prescott Brownell,
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife
Service, Ecological Services,
Charleston,
South Carolina;
Jim Henriksen,
U.S.
Fish
and Wildlife
Service,
National
Ecology
Center,
Fort Collins,
Colorado;
Mel Schamberger, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, National
Ecology Center, Fort
Collins,
Colorado; J.S.
Wakely
and an anonymous
reviewer,
U.S.
Army Corps of
Engineers,
Waterways Experiment Station,
Vicksburg,
Mississippi;
and
Douglas
Winford,
U.S.
Fish
and
Wildlife
Service,
Ecological
Services,
Cookeville,
Tennessee.
Word processing was provided by Elizabeth Barstow,
Patricia Gillis,
and
Dora
Ibarra.
Funding
for
preparation
and
publication
was
provided
by the
Terrestrial
Systems
Branch
of
the
National
Ecology
Center.
The
cover
was
designed by Susan Strawn.
Editorial assistance was provided by Jim Zuboy.
iv


INTRODUCTION
Habitat Suitability Index (SI) curves are one method of presenting species
habitat suitability criteria.
The curves
are
often
used
with
the
Habitat
Evaluation
Procedures (HEP) and are necessary components of the Instream Flow
Incremental
Methodology (IFIM)
(Armour et al.
1984).
Bovee (1986)
described
three categories
of
SI
curves
or
habitat suitability criteria
based on the
procedures and data used to develop the criteria.
Category I curves are based
on professional
judgment, with 1ittle or
no empirical data.
Both Category II
(utilization criteria) and Category III (preference criteria) curves
have
as
their source data collected at locations where target species are observed or
collected.
Having
Category II
and
Category III
curves
for
all
species
of
concern
would
be
ideal.
In
reality,
no SI
curves
are
available
for
many
species, and SI curves that require intensive field
sampling often cannot be
developed
under
prevailing
constraints
on time
and costs.
One alternative
under these
circumstances
is
the
development
and
interim
use
of
SI
curves
based
on
expert
opinion.
The
Delphi
technique
(Pill
1971;
Delbecq et al.
1975; Linstone and Turoff 1975) is one method used for combining the knowledge
and opinions of a group of experts.
The purpose of this report is to describe
how the Delphi technique may be used to develop expert-opinion-based SI curves.
Delphi was the name of
a meeting
site
in
ancient
Greece where
Oracles
(people through whom a deity was believed to speak) met, held discussions, and
gave wise or authoritative decisions or opinions.
The modern day Delphi was
first applied to a strategic planning exercise sponsored by the United States
Air Force in about 1953 (Dalkey and Helmer 1963).
Subsequently, the methodol-
ogy was widely accepted and applied in corporate planning (Fusfeld and Foster
1971) and used in the field of renewable resources management (Ludlow 1972a,b;
Zuboy 1981;
Heller et al.
1983).
More recently, it has
been
used to develop
expert-opinion-based
SI
curves
for
some
fish
species
(Crance
1984,1986,
1987a,b; Stier and Crance 1985).
Pill
(1971)
gave
a
comprehensive
review
of
the
Delphi
technique
and
provided
an
annotated
bibliography
on
the
subject.
Basically,
a
Delphi
exercise is a discussion by knowledgable participants in hopes of reaching an
agr~~ab\~ conclusion.
The concept is based on the premises that:
(1) opinions
of
experts
are justified as
inputs to decisionmaking where absolute answers
are
unknown; and
(2.) a
consensus
of
experts
wi 11
provide
a
more
accurate
response to a question than a single expert.
If these premises are valid or
acceptable to those that will receive and act on the product of the exercise,
the
conclusions
reached
(or SI curves developed using the technique)
should
have ut i 1ity.
1


At least three separate groups of individuals that perform three different
roles are needed to conduct a Delphi exercise (Turoff 1970):
(1) the decision-
makers--the group that will
receive and act on the
product of
the exercise;
(2) a group (or person) that designs the initial questionnaire, summarizes the
returns, and redesigns the follow-up questionnaire; and (3) a respondent group
whose judgments
are
being
sought
and are
asked
to respond to the question-
naires.
The general
procedures
for
a
Delphi
exercise
are
as
follows:
(1) the
experts are polled on a question or series of questions; (2) the responses are
tabulated, analyzed, and fed back to the experts; and (3) the experts reanswer
the questions in light of the information generated by the aggregate responses.
This process is repeated until a consensus is reached.
The primary characteristic of Delphi is anonymity.
Correspondence is the
communication
mode
normally
used.
An
exercise
to
develop
Delphi-based
SI
curves for a species would likely operate as
follows.
A group of experts is
identified.
The objectives and procedures of the Delphi exercise are explained
to each expert.
The experts agree to participate as panelists.
Each panelist
gives his opinion or estimate on the inquiry.
The results, including rationale
given by each panelist,
are summarized
and fed
back to each panelist,
ending
the first iteration or round.
Panelists answer the inquiry again,
in light of
the information generated by the collective response to round 1.
This process
is
repeated
until
a consensus
or
acceptable
level
of
agreement is reached.
The exercise is terminated (usually after four rounds)
and the procedures and
results are documented, including all rationale for agreement or disagreement.
An overview of this process is illustrated in Figure 1.
GUIDELINES
The following
guidelines for
developing
Delphi-generated
SI
curves
are
based primarily on procedures developed and used
by Crance (1987b).
Much of
the i nformat i on reported by De1becq et a1. (1975) is a1so incorporated.
NUMBER OF PANELISTS
The best number of panelists for a Delphi exercise has not been determin-
ed.
The number is generally governed by the number of respondents needed to
constitute
a
representative
pooling
of
judgments
and
by
the
information-
processing
capabil ities
of
the
design
and
monitoring
team
(Delbecq et al.
1975).
Hodgetts (1977)
indicated that at
least eight panelists are
needed,
but did not provide rationale for this minimum number.
A panel consisting of
about 10 experts is probably ideal,
but more than 10 may be used if desired.
The panel
should represent a diversity of knowledge about habitat use by the
species of interest,
but priority should be given to selecting panelists who
are knowledgable about habitat suitability for the species.
Overrepresentation
by "st akeholder s" or
individuals
from
a
single
agency,
interest
group,
or
geographical area should be avoided where possible.
2


w
St0.p_~e lim i nil rY_h
3 'Weeks
so roc t
pa no l
of experts.
Prepilre
i n f'o rma>
Lion packet
(sec Appendices
A-H)
and
ma i I
to
pane lists.
~tefJ.._LL_I J':(JlIrlcL;>L__3__....Q8 K~
Pa no l i s t s
r ev i ow
summa ry
a nd
prel i mI na r-y
curvcs
rcsulting
from
round
1,
i nd i c a t o
ilgreement or
d i sa q r-oomnn t
for
o ach
cur-ve
and
ma i l
r-c su l t s ,
opinions,
and
comments
to monitor.
StP,J1S 8 ilnd
~round II),
6 'Weeks
If fou rth
round
is nec o s sa ry,
repea t
steps
6
and
7.
Step 2
(round
1 l.
3 'Weeks
Pa no l i s t s
r'c v i cw
i nfo rma t i o n
packet,
complete question-
naires
(sec Appendices D-H),
'Write
comments,
a nd
ma i l
comments
and
completed question-
nil i res
to
mon i to r.
~J':l P~_ .. Lr_o_~~[!(L.n_L_L"'-~_~_Is~
r~onitor
s umma r i z e s
re s u t t s of
r-ound
2,
modifics
p rc l Imt na ry
curves
bilserl
on
now
i n to rtna t i o n ,
and
ma i Is
suuuna ry and curvcs
to
p anc t i st s for
rocons t dc ra t l on .
Step
H~pletionl. 3-4
'Weeks
Prepare completion
report
and
mail
to each participant.
Step
3
(round
1),
3 'Weeks
Monitor summarizes
results of
round
1,
prepares prel iminary
SI
curves
based
on
compOSite of
panelists'
estimates,
and mails
summary and
SI
curves
to panel-
ists for consideration.
St eJ~_~_lL_i!r!.rLl_LC!~IJ!!LlL.-6
'We eli§.
Rnp e a t, process
u se d
for
steps
4
and
~
un t i I
a
consensus or an
ilc0nptilble
Invel
of agreement
ha s
been
rea ched .
Figure 1.
An overview of the activities and approximate calendar time (weeks) associated with each major
step of a Delphi exercise for developing 51 curves.


SELECTION OF PANELISTS
Typically, the selection of panelists for a Delphi exercise to develop SI
curves
for
a
species
would
proceed
as
follows.
Two
or
three
individuals
considered to
be experts on the species are
found.
One is called and inter-
viewed.
The objectives
of
the
proposed
exercise,
the
Delphi
process
in
general,
and the
need for SI curves are discussed with the expert, and he is
asked the following questions:
Do you
feel
comfortable
being
considered
an
expert on the species?
Would you agree to serve as a panelist for the proposed
Delphi exercise?
Whom do you consider to be highly knowledgable about habitat
suitability
for
the
species?
Responses
to
these questions should give some
indication of the possibility of the expert being a panelist and should expand
the list of potential experts.
The above process is repeated until a list of 15 to 20 potential panelists
is obtained, or until
no new names are suggested to
the interviewer.
If the
list
contains
more
experts
than
desired
for
the
panel,
priority
should
be
gi ven to
those
with
the
best
knowl edge
about
habitat
requi rements
of
the
species,
those
whose
expertise
represents
an
important
geographical
area
within the range of the species, and those who show a high degree of interest
and willingness to participate in the exercise.
ROUND 1
Each panelist is mailed an information packet to begin round 1.
Examples
of items
included in the initial
information packet
are
shown
in
Appendices
A-H.
Add it i ona11 y,
genera 1 in format i on on SI
curve deve 1opment and use and
background on the Delphi technique may be included in the packet.
Appendix A is an example of a letter of confirmation and an expression of
appreciation to panelists for agreeing to participate.
The letter also reiter-
ates
the
purpose
of
the
exercise
and
gives
the
panelist
guidelines
on
responding.
A response time of 10 days is probably realistic;
less time may
discourage some panelists.
Panelists who do not respond within 10 days should
be contacted and tactfully encouraged to respond as soon as possible.
Appendix B is an example of instructions to help panelists focus on the
relationships between habitat variables and habitat suitability.
Definition of terms relevant to the SI curves to be developed need to
be
explicit and acceptable to all
panelists early in the exercise.
Examples of
some
pre 1i mi nary
defi nit ion s
for
inc 1us i on with
the
in format i on
pac ket
for
round 1 are given in Appendix C.
Examples of tables useful
for recording estimates of variable values and
SIl s for some life stages and activities of a species are given
in Appendices
D-G.
Estimates,
comments,
references,
and
logic
recorded
by
panelists
in
these tables in round 1 provide a basis for the preliminary SI curves for use
in round 2.
4


Cover
utilization
by
some
fish
species
is
difficult
to
classify
and
quantify.
Tables similar to those
shown
in Appendices
D-G may not
be
useful
for estimating cover variables
and
51 1s during the initial
round if important
cover variables for the species are
unknown.
Appendix H is
an
example
of
a
query that was
useful
during
round 1 for obtaining opinions on the importance
of cover to
a fish
species.
Responses to the query were
summarized
and
are
presented in Appendix I.
The
amount of time
between mailing an information packet to panelists to
begin round 1 and the beginning of round 2 will
likely
be
4 to 6 weeks.
This
includes
time
to
prepare
a
summary of the results of round 1 and
for typing
and mailing.
The
summary of
round 1 includes
a set of
preliminary
51 curves
for
each
variable
and
life
stage
considered
to
be
important
by
panelists.
Panelists·
comments pertinent to the curves should be included in the
summary,
but slight revisions or omissions may be needed to preserve anonymity.
The
medians
of
estimates
provided
by
the experts for each variable
and
life
stage
should
be
useful
as
coordinates
for
the
preliminary
51
curves.
Appendix J
is
an
example
of
how first-round
estimates
of water
temperature
sui tabi 1i ty for
a fi sh
speci es
were
summari zed
to
show
the
lower
and
upper
quartile
ranges and the median of the estimates.
In this example,
some panel-
ists indicated that water temperature never increases or decreases to
a
level
where
51=0.
This
was
due
to
some
panelists
interpreting
the
question
to
relate to
stream temperature
in their area only,
where,
under
normal
condi-
tions, stream temperatures never increased or decreased to a level where 51=0.
Preliminary curves resulting from round 1 may also be based on the lowest
and highest estimates given for a variable.
For example, if several
panelists
estimated that the optimum range for percent of habitat with suitable cover is
20% to 70%,
and several other panelists estimated the
optimum range to
be
30%
to
80~c;,
20~c; to
80?c; would
be
used for the preliminary curve.
In this example,
all
of
the
initial
estimates
would
be
included
in
the
preliminary
curve.
Opportunity for
agreement or disagreement and adjustment of the optimum range
could occur (if justified) during round 2,
based on a composite of the informa-
tion in hand.
ROUND 2
A new
information
packet
is
mailed
to
each
panelist
to
begin
round 2.
The packet includes a summary of the results of
round 1,
a set of preliminary
51
curves,
questionnaries,
and instructions for
round 2.
Areas of agreement
and disagreement are identified
and discussed,
and definitions are clarified,
if necessary.
The
questionnaires
for
round 2 are essentially the preliminary
51
curves
developed
from
a
composite
of
the
information
accumulated
during
round 1.
Panelists respond to the questionnaires by reviewing the information
and indicating agreement or disagreement with each preliminary 51 curve.
If
a
panelist disagrees with
a curve,
he sketches his own version of the curve and
gives its x,y coordinates.
He then writes comments,
references,
and
logic to
support
his
version.
If
he
agrees
with
a
preliminary
51
curve,
he
gives
reinforcing
comments
to
support
his
position.
Responses
to
round 2
are
summarized
and
evaluated
by
the
monitor
and
fed
back
to
the
panelists
for
5


reevaluation
during
round 3.
The
preliminary
curves
are
modified
by
the
supporting information, if warranted.
SUBSEQUENT ROUNDS
Procedures
used
in
round 2 are
repeated
in subsequent rounds.
The exer-
cise is terminated
when
a consensus or an
acceptable
level
of
agreement
has
been
reached
on
the
curves.
An
example
of
how a consensus
on
estimates of
water
temperature
for
spawning
evolved
during
a
4-round
Delphi
exercise
is
given in Appendix
K.
FINAL REPORT
The
final
report
provides
feedback
to
the
panelists
and
other partic-
ipants that contributed both
time
and
work to
the
effort.
The
final
report
summarizes
the
goals
and
process,
as
well
as
the
results;
agreements
and
disagreements
(if
any)
resulting
from
the
exercise,
and
names
of
all
participants, are included in the final report.
DISCUSSION
Delbecq et al.
(1975)
presented
some
advantages and disadvantages of the
Delphi
technique
and
the
Nominal
Group
Technique
(NGT).
The
NGT
employs
structured
face-to-face meetings
to obtain
and combine expert opinion and may
be
used to
develop
SI
curves.
A decisionmaking
process
involving the choice
of
the
Delphi
technique
or
the
NGT
for
developing
expert-opinion-based
SI
curves will
likely reflect real-world constraints,
such as the
amount of time
required,
costs,
travel
ceilings,
and
the
proximity of participants.
On the
basis of
time
and
costs
required
for
participants,
the
Delphi
technique
is
superior to the NGT.
If participants have the time and no large travel costs,
however,
the
NGT
requires
less
administrative
costs
and
efforts,
and
the
information
can
be
collected
in
less
time.
A Delphi
exercise
conducted
by
Crance (1987b) to develop SI
curves for redbreast
sunfish
lasted 8 months
and
the effort required was about 50 person-days (one fishery biologist = 22 days,
one
typi st = 6
days,
and
11
pane 1i sts x 0.5
days
per
round x 4
rounds = 22
days).
Because a Delphi exercise does not require face-to-face contact, it is
particularly useful
for involving experts, users, or administrators who cannot
come
together
physically.
The
technique
may
also
be
used
to
aggregate
judgments
where
people
are
hostile
toward
one
another,
or
where
individual
personality styles would be distracting.
The
amount of effort,
calendar time,
and
money required are concerns of
potential
developers
and users
of
SI
curves.
The
Delphi
technique
is
not
a
" qui ck
fi XII or
a
II free
1unch"
approach to
SI
curve deve 1opment.
Use of the
technique to develop SI curves is still
more art
than
science.
The
amount of
calendar
time
required
to
develop
SI
curves
can
probably
be
reduced
with
increased use of the technique for this purpose.
The
number of rounds required
6


to
complete
an exercise can be kept to a mi ni rnurn by providing the panelists
clear objectives, definitions, guidelines,
and instructions at
the
beginning
of round 1.
The purpose of most Delphi exercises that I have conducted was to
develop
SI
curves
for
variables
commonly
considered
in
the
assessment
of
habitat of riverine fish species.
The exercises were started with a request
that each panel i st focus on the re 1at ion shi ps between habitat suitabi 1ity and
each
of
the
variables
commonly
used
with
the
1F1M (i .e.,
velocity,
depth,
temperature, substrate, and cover).
The experts were given an opportunity to
identify other variables considered
to
be important,
but they were asked to
focus
on variables
commonly
used
with
the
1F1M.
The
identification
and
importance of variables that affect habitat suitability for a species could be
the single subject of a Delphi exercise that may last three or four rounds.
I have not used the Delphi
technique to modify
SI curves,
but feel
that
the technique has potential for this purpose.
An exercise to modify SI curves
could begin at step 4 (Figure 1), reducing the calendar time needed to complete
the exercise
by about
6 weeks.
Another potential
(but untested)
use of the
Delphi
technique
is
the
formulation
of
a
suitable
aggregation
equation
to
combine the individual SI values for each variable used in a model.
Delbecq
et al.
(1975)
pointed
out
that
like all
group
responses,
the
quality of Delphi responses is very much influenced by the interest and commit-
ment of the participants.
Delphi exercises require especially high motivation
by participants, since other people are not present to provide stimulation.
Fish were used as
examples
in this report because
my application of the
Delphi
technique
has
been
limited
to fish species.
The technique should be
equally applicable to terrestrial
species.
Some questions that will
probably
arise during a Delphi exercise for a fish species are:
Where is water velocity
measured?
What are the temporal and spatial
limitations for the curves being
developed?
Should food
abundance and availability be considered as important
variables?
Are backwater areas of large river reservoirs lentic or lotic?
An
easy
or
standard
answer
may
not
be
available,
but
such
questions
need
resolution to the satisfaction of all participants.
Delphi exercises provide a more updated and lively exchange of scientific
or technical
information
than a literature search, but the technique is not a
replacement for
scientific
methods
traditionally
used
to
gather
information
for SI curve development.
However, it is an option that should be considered
when SI curves or data for developing needed SI curves are unavailable.
To
date,
few
Delphi-derived
SI
curves
for
a
fish
species
have
been
compared
to criteria developed from data obtained by sampling the species in
its
habitat.
Baldridge
(1981)
compared
SI
curves
for
spawning
pink
salmon
generated by professional
judgment with SI curves subsequently generated from
data obtained
from
sampling
pink
salmon
spawning
habitat.
The two sets
of
criteria were very similar.
Delphi-derived
SI
curves
represent
"average"
val ues
of
habitat qual ity
for a species and will be useful only for predicting "average" Sl ls.
Potential
users
of
SI
curves
should
scrutinize
the
information
used
to
develop
the
curves and judge the adequacy of the curves for a specific need.
Bovee (1986)
7


stated that
decisions
regarding
water
management will
proceed regardless of
the qua 1i ty of the
bi 01 og i ca 1 in forma t i on
and
may be
made
'I'd th
no input
from
the
biological
community.
In
view
of
this,
Delphi-derived
SI
curves
are
likely to be vastly superior to no SI curves.
At the conclusion of several
Delphi
exercises
I
conducted,
the panelists
were
requested
to
comment
on
the
Delphi
process
in
general
and
on
their
participation in the exercise.
Some selected comments that resulted
from the
requests follow:
"I
believe
that
the
Delphi
exercise was
a worthwhile effort and
a
learning experience, and that it is a feasible method for developing
SI curves for selected species."
"Curves
for this
species probably could not
have
been
accomplished
using only the information currently available in the literature."
"I believe the Delphi technique is a reasonable replacement for hard
data.
Even with hard data, it would be difficult to get a consensus.
The
results
of
this
exercise
are
probably
the
best
information
available on the species."
"This
has been
a valuable technique for assembling data
based
on a
wealth of experience
by utilizing
a
number of participants with
an
adequate background."
liThe
Delphi
technique allows field
people
to obtain
a
good idea of
what
other
specialists
are
thinking
and
forces
each
individual
panelist to
probe
a little deeper as to why one person answered the
way he did."
"This is a
good
method
to
collect
and
amass
existing
data
on
the
parameters
included.
The
information
could
be
helpful
to
water
quality monitoring agencies and fishery biologists."
"I found the exercise very interesting and informative.
However,
it
relies on a consensus of experts.
There are instances in the history
of science where the general consensus of experts has been wrong."
"Biologists do
not like to give opinions which
may subsequently
be
erroneously interpreted and reported as data."
"The
Delphi
technique
can
go astray if a
few
people with
strongly
held opinions
refuse to
acknowledge
one person's opinion
backed
by
data."
"One weakness of the Delphi
technique is that it tends to dilute a
single
minority
opinion
which
in
some
cases
may
be
more
accurate
than the majority opinion."
8


IIWe should
be more careful
in
concealing the identity of panelists.
It is possible to determine the identity of panelists
by the flavor
of their comments and references to geographical areas in the summary
of a round.
1I
liThe SI curves should be updated and/or validated pe r t od i ca l l y ;"
"Bei nq asked specific questions
and
being
reqUired
to
be
specific
and qua nt i fY answe r s was good for for c i ng my tho ught processe s . II
III
enjoyed participating
in
the Delphi exercises even though it was
time consuming.
1I
"Probab ly
the
most
useful
attribute
of
the
Delphi
technique
is
identification of areas that need further research for the species."
REFERENCES
Armour,
C.L.,
R.J.
Fisher,
and J.W.
Terrell.
1984.
Comparison of the use of
the Habitat Evaluation
Procedures
(HEP)
and
the
Instream
Flow
Incremental
Methodology
(IFIM)
in
aquatic analyses.
U.S.
Fish Wildl.
Servo
FvJS/DBS-84/
11.
30 pp.
Baldridge, J.E.
1981.
Development of habitat suitability criteria:
appendix
3.
Pages 357-419
in
W.J.
Wilson,
E.W.
Trihey, J.E.
Baldridge,
C.D.
Evans,
J.G. Thiele, and D.E": Trudgen,
eds.
An
assessment of environmental
effects
of
construction
and
operation
of
the
proposed
Terror
Lake
hydroelectric
facility,
Kodiac, Alaska.
Arctic Environmental
Information and
Data Center,
University of Alaska, Anchorage.
Bovee,
K.D.
1986.
Development and evaluation of habitat suitability criteria
for use in the Instream Flow Incremental Methodology.
Instream Flow Informa-
tion Paper 21.
U.S. Fish Wildl. Servo Biol. Rep. 86(7).
235 pp.
Crance, J.H.
1984.
ability
curves:
FWS/DBS-82/10.85.
Habitat suitability
index models and instream flow suit-
inland
stocks
of
striped
bass.
U.S.
Fish
Wildl.
Servo
63 pp.
1985.
Delphi
technique
procedures
used
to
develop
habitat
suitability
index
models
and
instream
flow
suitability
curves
for
inland
stocks of striped bass.
U.S. Fish Wildl. Servo WELUT-85/W07.
58 pp.
1986.
suitability curves:
82(10.129).
31 pp.
Habitat
suitability
shortnose
sturgeon.
index
models
and
instream
flow
U.S.
Fish Wildl.
Servo
Biol.
Rep.
1987a.
Habitat suitability curves for paddlefish developed by
the Delphi technique.
N. Am. J. Fish. Manage. 7:123-130.
1987b.
Results on the use of the Delphi technique for develop-
ing Category I habitat sUitability criteria for redbreast sunfish.
Proceed-
ings of Species Criteria Workshop,
Fort Collins,
CD,
Dec.
10-12,
1986.
In
Press.
9


Dalkey, N.C., and O. Helmer.
1963.
An experimental application of the Delphi
method to the use of experts.
Mgmt. Sci. 9:458-467.
Delbecq,
A.L.,
A.H.
Van
deVen,
and
D.H.
Gustafson.
1975.
Group
techniques
for program planning - a guide to nominal
group and Delphi processes.
Scott
Foresman and Company, Glenview, IL.
194 pp.
Fusfeld,
A.R.,
and
R.N.
Foster.
1971.
The
Delphi
technique:
survey
and
comment.
Business Horizons 14(6):63-74.
Heller,
D.A., J.R.
Maxwell,
and
M. Parsons.
forest
management
on
salmonid
habitat.
Siuslaw Natl. For., Gresham, OR.
63 pp.
Hodgetts,
R.M.
1977.
Applying
the
Delphi
Simulation 29(1):209-212.
1983.
Model ing
the
effects
of
U.S.
Dept.
Agric.,
For.
Serv.,
techn i que
to
management
gami ng.
Linstone, H.A.,
and
M. Turoff, eds.
1975.
The Delphi method.
Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MS.
620 pp.
Ludlow, J.D.
1972a.
Evaluation of methodology in the University of Michigan's
Sea
Grant Delphi
inquiry.
University of Michigan Sea Grant Tech.
Rep.
22.
Ann Arbor, MI.
90 pp.
1972b.
Substantive
results
of
the
University
of
Michigan's
Sea
Grant Delphi
inquiry.
University of Michigan Sea Grant Tech.
Rep.
23.
Ann Arbor, MI.
102 pp.
Pill,
J.
1971.
The
Delphi
method:
substance,
context,
a critique
and
an
annotated bibliography.
Socio-Econ. Plan. Sci. 5:57-71.
Stier,
D.J.,
and
J.H.
Crance.
1985.
Habitat
suitability
index
models
and
instream
flow
suitability
curves:
American
shad.
U.S.
Fish
Wildl.
Servo
Bio1. Rep. 82(10.88).
34 pp.
Turoff,
M.
1970.
The design of a policy Delphi.
Technological
Forecasting
and Social Change 2:149-171.
Zuboy, J.R.
1981.
A new tool
for
fishery
managers:
the
Delphi
technique.
N. Am. J. Fish. Manage. 1:55-59.
10


Appendix A.
Letter mailed to panelists to begin round 1 of a Delphi
exercise conducted to develop SI curves for redbreast sunfish.
Thank you for agreeing to serve as a panelist for the redbreast sunfish Delphi
exercise.
The purpose of the exercise is to
develop Suitability Index
(S1)
curves
for
use with the Instream Flow Incremental Methodology (IFIM) in the assessment of
riverine
habitat
of
redbreast
sunfish.
The Delphi
technique
is
being
used
because field data and information available in the literature are inadequate
for developing SI curves for the species.
Available information on redbreast
sunfish
will
be
used
in
developing
the
curves,
but
opinions
of
the
Delphi
panelists will be the primary basis for the resultant curves.
General
information about the Delphi
technique and SI curve development,
and
instructions and materials for completing the first round of the exercise are
enclosed.
A few hours of your time will be required to complete the first
and
subsequent
rounds
of
the
De 1phi.
You,
no doubt,
have
many demands on your
time
but
please
respond
to
each
round
promptly.
We
should
complete
the
exercise
in
about
6 to
8 months,
assuming that four or five
rounds will
be
required and that all
panelists
respond
to
each
round
within
10 days after
receipt of material.
You may wish to get an associate to serve as panelist in
your behalf if you are unable to respond within 10 days.
I will
serve as monitor of the exercise.
This means that
I will
prepare the
material
for
each
round,
summarize
responses,
and
prepare
a final
report,
including rationale for the curves developed.
Anonymity among panelists will
be maintained until the exercise is completed.
Thank you again for consenting to be a panelist.
I look forward to receipt of
your input.
11


Appendix B.
Instructions used by panelists to begin round 1 of a Delphi
exercise to develop 51 curves for redbreast sunfish.
1.
Consider
the
relationships
between
riverine
habitat
suitability
for
redbreast sunfish for each of the variables -- velocity, depth, substrate,
cover,
and temperature.
What
t s the relationship between
each
variable
and habitat suitability for each life stage or activity (e.g., spawning,
incubation, larval, juvenile, adult, or other life stage or activity)?
2.
Next,
complete
the
attached tables
(Appendices
D-G).
Information that
you enter in the tables will serve as the basis for preliminary 51 curves
that will be developed by the monitor.
These preliminary 51 curves will
be presented for consideration during round 2.
3.
List references, data sources, or any information available that you wish
to use as the basis of your curve.
It is
important that you
use your
"qut" feeling
or opinion,
even if no data are available.
You may choose
to
ignore all
available
data
or
information
and
use
only
your
"qut"
feeling or opinion as the basis of your curve.
If you mention a refer-
ence, please give the complete citation or send the monitor a copy of the
report.
If the reference has
been published in a popular journal or has
been widely circulated and is likely available
in
small
libraries,
you
need not send it.
4.
Write
comments,
ideas,
logic,
reference,
etc.,
at
the
bottom
of
each
table or on the reverse of the page.
5.
If you feel that a variable or a life stage other than those listed in a
table
is
important
and
should
be
considered
for
an 51 curve,
please
clearly define the variable, explain how the variable is quantified,
and
give
the
specific
size-group,
season,
or unique life stage or activity
the variable applies to.
6.
If you
have questions,
you
may call
me.
Please
return
your
response
with i n 10 day s .
12


Appendix C.
Preliminary definitions of some terms considered by panelists
at the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop SI curves for
redbreast sunfish.
The redbreast sunfish Delphi exercise will be concerned with the riverine
(lotic) habitat used by the various life stages of the species.
A definition
of
some terms
1ike ly to be used duri ng the exerci se has been assumed.
If you
disagree with a general definition listed below,
please give your definition
of the term and/or any other terms that you feel need clarification.
Spawning habitat.
Crucial
habitat
for
adults
during
spawning,
including
courtship, the release of eggs and sperm, and fertilization.
Incubation habitat.
Crucial habitat of eggs during incubation.
Larval habitat.
Crucial habitat of larvae from hatching to juvenile stage or
while the fish are a specified length or age.
Juvenile habitat.
Crucial
habitat
of
juveniles
until
sexual
maturity
is
reached or while the fish are a specified length or age.
Adult habitat.
Crucial
habitat of
sexually mature
fish
(excluding
spawning
activities).
If crucial habitat requirements for a particular size, age,
or activity differ, specifics are needed.
13


Appendix D.
Table used for soliciting opinions on water velocity suitability at the
beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop 51 curves for redbreast sunfish.
OELPHI
ROUND
1 -
WATER VELOCITY
Date
Pane list
Complete
this table by fi II ing
in each column wi t h
t he
wa t e r vcJ~
(ft/s)
con s l de red
to
be appropriate for each
I ife
stage or activity of
the
species.
Othe r b
Adults
Juven i I es
La rvae
Incubation
(eggs)
5pa'rining
_______,-----_----,------c~----~VeI oc i ty (ft/ s )
Velocity condition
1.
Level
velocity must decrease
to
for
51=OC (use
N if never occurs)
2.
LO'riest velocity considered
to
be
optimal
(51=1).
I-'
+::> 3.
Highest velocity considered
to
be
op t i rna I
(5 I = 1 ) .
II.
Leve I
ve 1oc i ty mus t
inc rca se
to
for
51=OC (usc
N if never occurs).
5.
Velocity
level(s)
'rihere
51=0.5
(use
N is never occurs).
aCenerally thc
mean column velocity (velocity at 0.6 of depth measured
from 'riater surface).
HO'rievcr,
more specific measure-
ments are
used
sometimes.
What do you
mean
by velocity relative
to
the values you wi Ll
give
in this
table?
Underline
the
ro r t ow l no
phrase that most closely describes your use of velocity:
Velocity at
surface of wat c r .
Velocity wi t h i n
6
inches
of stream bottom.
Velocity at site of fish/activity
(e.g"
nose velocity).
Mean column velocity.
Other (please define)
b5peCifY any other riverine
I ire
stage or activity that you consider to
be
important
and fi I I
in column.
CVelocity
level
is totally unsuitable 'rihen
51=0.


Appendix E.
Table used for soliciting opinions on water depth suitability at the beginning
of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop 51 curves for redbreast sunfish.
DELPHI
ROUND 1 -
WATER DEPTH
Date
Panel i s t
Complete this table by filling
in each column w i t h the wa t e r depth a
considered to be
<lppropriate for each life st<lge or activity of the species.
W<1ter depth (ft-l
Cepth condition
1.
Depth wa t e r must dec rea se
to for SI=O. C
2.
Minimum depth considered
optimal
(5 1=1 ) .
.......
<.J1 3.
Maximum depth considered
optimal
(5 I=1).
't.
Depth ",ater must
inc rea se
to for SI=OC (use N if
never occurs).
5.
Depth(s) ",here SI=0.5.
Spawn i ng
Incubation
(eggs)
L<1 r va o
.Juve n i los
Adults
Other b
a Indicate ",hat you mean by depth
in the context of the values you ",i I I use
in this table by underl ining the fol lo",ing
phrase that most clearly describes your use of depth:
Average ",ater depth.
Nose depth or depth at fish/egg/activity.
Other (please define)
bSpecifY any other riverine life stage or activity that you consider to be
important and fill
in column.
C Depth is total fy unsuitable when 51=0.


Appendix F.
Table used for soliciting opinions on water temperature suitability at the
beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop SI curves for redbreast sunfish.
DELPHI
EXERCISE
ROUND
1
-
WATER
TEMPERATUHE
Date
Panelist
Complete this
table
by fi II ing
in each
column 'With
the ",ater
temperat~LC'U considered
to
be
appropriate for each life
stage or activity of
the
species.
Temperature condition
1.
Tempera t u re v« t c r
mus t
decrease to for
SI~o.b
2.
Lo'West
temperature considered
to
be
optimal
(SI=l) .
......
0"1 3.
Highest
temperature considered
to
be
optimal
(SI=1).
4.
Temperature 'Water must
increase to for SI=O.b
5.
Temperature(s)
'Where SI=0.5.
________________________ '!IJ}J.~L_g_CJniL.u.Ln_!Ll~__
Incubation
Spawn i nq
(8Q9S)
I a r-va e
Juveniles
Adults
Othera
a Specify any other riverine
life stage or activity that you consider to
be
important
and fi II
in column.
b Temperature
is totally unsuitable 'When SI=O.


Appendix G.
Table used for soliciting opinions on substrate suitability at the beginning
of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop 51 curves for redbreast sunfish.
DELPHI
EXERCISE
ROUND
I
-
SUHSIRATE
Date
Panel i s t
Complete this
t.ab l o
by filling
in each column wi t h
the appropriate
SI
(O.O-l.O)a for each
substrate
type b
a nd
life s t aqe
or activity of the species.
.
..
d
(
l a
SUI t a b I I I ty
I n ex
0.0- I .0
______S!Lb_s_t rilt~J.Yj)Jl
_
Code
Particle size
Spawning
Incubation
(eggs)
La rvae
Juveniles
Adu Its
C
Other
a Substrate
is totally unsuitable when
51=0.
If substrate
is optimal,
SI=1.
b l nd i c a t e what you
mean by substrate
in the context of
how you w i II
use it for this
table.
Underl ine
the
following
phrase
t ha t
most closely describes your meaning:
Dominant
substrate particles on surface of substrate.
Material
comprising
highest percentage
(by weight)
of grab
sample.
Other (please define)
C Specify any other riverine
J ife
stage or activity that you consider to
be
important and fi II
in column.


Appendix H.
Statement used for querying panelists about cover suitability
at the beginning of round 1 of a Delphi exercise to develop SI curves for
redbreast sunfish.
Date
Panelist ---------
If you consider cover to be important to the well-being of any life stage or
activity
of
redbreast
sunfish
please
describe
what
the
cover
is,
how it
benefits a life stage or activity of the species,
how it may be quantified
in
relation
to
habitat
suitability,
what
happens if there
is
more cover,
less
cover,
no cover, etc.
Sketch your version of any cover SI
considered to
be
important.
Use the space below and reserve side of page, if needed.
18


Appendix I.
A summary of responses to the cover query presented
in Appendix H.
Instructions for round 2.
The SIts listed below are estimates based on
information provided by panelists in response to the cover query considered
during round 2 of the redbreast sunfish Delphi exercise.
Please consider the
suitability indices for cover types listed below.
If a cover type named is
not important, mark it out or consolidate it with another type.
If you
disagree with the SI indicated, change the SI to what you feel it should be.
Return your results to the Delphi monitor.
Suitability indices and 1ife stages or activity
Cover typea
Spawning
Larvae
Juvenile
Adult
l.
Logs, brush. stumps, snags
1.0
0.2
0.8
1.0
2.
Boulders
0.7
0.2
0.5
0.7
3.
Gravel-small cobble
0.0
1.0
0.7
0.2
4.
Steep banks with over-
hanging vegetation and
willow roots
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.5
5.
Aquatic vegetation
( rooted macrophytes)
0.0
1.0
1.0
0.4
6.
Plant detritus and/or
organic material
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.1
7.
Other
aCover can simply be described as any feature of a stream that provides
reduced lighting, reduced velocity, or increased visual isolation.
Even
more simply, cover is something the fish can either get under or behind.
Cover may also provide suitable substrate or habitat for food organisms
utilized by the fish.
19


Appendix J.
A summary of first-round estimates of water temperature
suitability for sauger spawning, incubation, and adults.
Lower
Upper
quartile
quartile
Spawning - Temperature (OF)
range
Median
range
1
Leve1 must decrease to
for 51 ::: 0
35
38
40
40
46
2
Lowest optimum value
39
41
44
45
50
3
Highest optimum value
44
49
50
55
64
4
Level must increase to for
51 ::: 0 (N ::: doesn't occur)
48
53
60
61
N
Incubation-Temperature (0 F)
1
Level must decrease to
for 51 ::: 0
33
35
39
40
46
2
Lowest optimum value
40
45
46
48
52
3
Highest optimum value
40
52
57
60
65
4
Level must increase to for
51 ::: 0 (N ::: doesn't occur)
48
61
70
71
N
Adults - Temperature (OF)
Level must decrease to
for 51 ::: 0
N
31
32
32
34
2
Lowest optimum value
32
36
50
64
65
3
Highest optimum value
65
67
70
71
80
4
Level must increase to
for 51
::: 0
75
80
80
87
96
20


Appendix K.
An example of how water temperature criteria for spawning evolved
during a 4-round Delphi exercise to develop 51 curves for sauger.
Results
at end
of
round
LQ",,_t,QrrlpPX'!lL1!'C)_IQL_?L ~O
Temperature
Pane lists
con s l ue red
d i s a q r-ee Lnq
!,.(j"LJQ.!!lP.Qr::a tur:Q_L~~_~ I=1
Temperature
Panelists
con s i de red
d i say r ee i fly
IJLqtLJ-_Qrnpc_r::atu re_Ll2-r::._~J-=l
Temperature
Pane lists
cons i de red
d i sag ree i ng
ULq~JerTipe r a t.u r e
fo r
5 I =0
Temperature
Panel i s t s
cons i de red
d i say re e i ny
Hound
2a
Round
3
Round
4f
Iloor
,b
1111 ° r
0
50 0r
IIC
60°F
3d
39°r
0
114° F
0
55°F
0
65°F
,e
39°F
0
44°F
0
55°F
0
65°F
0
aTemperatures for
round
2 were
the median of
the estimates given by the panel ists during
round'
using
a table
simi jar
to Appendix r.
bTh i s panelist presented convincing
rationale for
lowering the
temperature
to 39"F.
CThree panel i s t s who
disagreed presented convincing
information for
increasing
the
temperature
to 55"F.
The other
panel ists
indicated that
the temperature
should
be
decreased to 48°F but did not give supporting
rationale.
d Eac h of the
three panel i s t s presented evidence that
sauger
spawn at
temperatures above 60"F and,
therefore,
this
tempe ra t u re
shout d
be
inc rea sed
to
abou t
65" F.
N
...... e Th i s panelist
indicated that 65°F would
result
in 51=0.2
instead of 51=0.
However,
he did not present supporting
statements.
fpanelists
reached
a consensus on
spawning
temperatures at
the end of
round 4.


50212-101
REPORT DOCUMENTATION 11. REPORT NO.
1 2•
PAGE
Bioloqical Report 82(10.134)
4. Title and Subtitle
Guidelines for Using the Delphi Technique to Develop Habitat
Suitability Index Curves
7. Author(s)
Johnie H. Crance
9.
PerformIn. Oraanlzatlon Name and Address
National Ecology Center
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Creekside One Building
2627 Redwing Road
Fort Collins,
CO
80526-2899
12. Sponsorinll Orllonizatlon Name end Addres.
Division of Wildlife and Contaminant Research
Fish and Wildlife Service
Department of the Interior
Washington, DC
20240
15. Supplementary Note.
16. Abstract (limit: 200 words)
3. Recipient's Accession No.
50 Report Date
April
1987
S. Performlnll Or.anlzation Rept. No.
10. Project/Task/Work Unit No.
11. Contract(C) Of' Grant(G) No.
ec)
(G)
13. Type of Report & Period Covered
14.
The Delphi technique is one method used for combining the knowledge and 0plnlons of a
group of experts.
The primary characteristic of Delphi is anonymity; correspondence
is the communication mode normally used.
The concept is based on the premises that
opinions of experts are justified as input to decisionmaking where absolute answers
are unknown, and a consensus of experts will provide a more accurate response to a
question than a single expert.
The guidelines presented are for using the Delphi technique to develop habitat
Suitability Index (SI) curves.
SI curves are often used with the Habitat Evaluation
Procedures and are necessary components of the Instream Flow Incremental Methodology.
The Delphi technique is not a replacement for scientific methods traditionally used to
gather information for SI curve development, but it offers an option that should be
considered when SI curves or data for developing needed SI curves are unavailable.
---:-------------------------------------------1
Habi tabil i ty
fYla thema ti ca1 model s
b. Identlfiers/Open·Ended Term.
Delphi technique
Expert opinion
Habitat Suitability Index Curves
c. COSAT' Field/Group
18. Availability Statement
Release unlimited
(S.. ANSI-Z39.18)
19. Security Class (This Report)
Imrl.:lc::c::ifi""ri
20. security Class (This Pa.e)
unclassified
S•• Instruction. on R.ver••
21. No. of Palles
?l
22.
Price
OPTIONAL FORM 272 (4-77)
(Formerly NTIS-35)
Department of Commerce


TAKE
PRIDE IN
AMERICA
•- .
Preserve Our Natural Resources
DEPARTMENT OF THEINTERIOR
u.s. FISH AND WILDLIFESERVICE
l ',S.
t 'IHH .. WILOU.'I!:
"'F."V"'.:
~
~
As the Nation 's principal conservat ion aBency, the Department of the Interior has respon-
sibility for most of our nationally owned public lands and natural resources. This includes
fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources, protectinB our fish and wildlife,
preservinB th a.environmental and cult ural values of our national parks and historical places,
and provldinB for the enjoyment of life t hrough outdoor recreation. The Department al·
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to essure that their development is in
the best Interests of all our people. The Department also has a major responsibility for
American Ind ian reservat ion communities and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. adm inistration.
