--- 
source: 2008-17.pdf
--- 

68
2.4.2 FAO Species Identification Sheets
Marine Mammals of the World
Other scientific names still in use: Physeter macrocephalus Linnaeus, 1758.
FAO Names: En - Sperm whale; Fr - Cachalot; Sp - Cachalote.
Distinctive Characteristics: The largest toothed
cetacean, the sperm whale, is unlikely to be con-
fused with any other species. The body is some-
what laterally compressed and the head is huge
(one-quarter to one-third of the total head is huge
an even greater proportion of the total bulk) and
squarish when viewed from the side. The lower
jaw is narrow and underslung. The single S-
shaped blowhole is set at the front of the head and
is offset to the left. The flippers are wide and
spatulate, and the flukes are broad and triangular
with a nearly straight trailing edge, rounded tips,
and a deep notch. There is a low rounded dorsal
hump and a series of bumps, or crenulations, on
the dorsal ridge of the tail stock. The body surface
tends to be wrinkled behind the head.
Sperm whales are predominantly black to
brownish grey, with white areas around the mouth
and often on the belly. Functional teeth (18 to 25
pairs that fit into sockets in the upper jaw) are
present in the lower jaw only. The bushy blow
projects up to 5 m and, because of the position of
the blowhole, is directed forward and to the left.
On windless days, such an angled blow is diag-
nostic.
Adult males and females can be distinguished not
only by size differences, but also by the presence
or absence of calluses on the dorsal hump. A
large percentage of females (about 85%) have
calluses, whereas males almost never have theam                         llllllllllllllllllll
Fig. 195 Physeter catodon
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Physeter catodon Linnaeus, 1758
PHYS Phys 1 
SPW
VENTRAL VIEW
Fig. 196 Skull
click for previous page


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Physeteridae 
69
Fig. 197 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: Sperm whales are generally easy to distinguish from other large whales at sea,
even at a great distance. The uniquely angled blow is diagnostic, but one must be careful to take into account
the effects of wind on a whale’s blow. Only humpbacks (p. 60), and possibly gray whales (p. 62), would likely
confused with sperm whales, and this only at a great distance.
Size: Newborn sperm whales are 3.5 to 4.5 m long. Adult females are up to 12 m and adult males are up
to 18 m in length. Weights of up to 57 t have been recorded.
Geographical Distribution: Sperm whales are distributed from the tropics to the pack-ice edges in both
hemispheres, although generally only large males venture to the extreme northern and southern portions of
the range (poleward of 40º latitude). Deep divers, sperm whales tend to inhabit oceanic waters, but they do
come close to shore where submarine canyons or other physical features bring deep water near the coast.
Biology and Behaviour: Although bulls are sometimes seen singly (especially above 40” latitude), sperm
whales are more often found in medium to large groups of up to fifty whales. Recently, the social system of
sperm whales has been relatively well-studied. Apparently they are polygynous: adult males seem to employ
a “searching” strategy for mating, associating with nursery groups of adult females and their offspring for
only short periods of time. Sexually mature but non-breeding males that have been displaced from their
maternal pods form bachelor herds. Most births occur in summer and autumn. Sperm whales are deep
divers, apparently capable of reaching depths of 3 200 m or more. Some dives of bulls, which are longer
than those of the smaller cows, last at least 2 hours. Fluking-up is common before a long dive. Low-fre-
quency, stereotyped, clicked vocalizations, some of which are termed “codas,” are apparently distinct to
individual sperm whales and may act as acoustic signatures. Some clicks are also probably used in
echolocation. An amazing variety of fish, cephalopods, and non-food items has been found in the stomachs
of sperm whales from around the world. Cephalopods (squid and octopuses), however, are considered to
be the major prey items.
Exploitation: Sperm whaling has a long history. The most intense periods were the “Yankee whaling” era
of the 1800s and the factory ship whaling of the 20th century. Recent findings of studies on social behaviour
and breeding undermine assumptions in the models on which exploitation and management have long been
based. Certain populations have been depleted, but the sperm whale remains the most abundant of all the
great whales (Great whales generally include the sperm whale and all baleen whales, except the pygmy right
whale).
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 198


70
Kogia breviceps (de Blainville, 1838)
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Pygmy sperm whale: Fr - Cachalot pygmée; Sp - Cachalote pigmeo.
Fig. 199 Kogia breviceps
Distinctive Characteristics: Pygmy and dwarf
sperm whales are very difficult to detect, except in
extremely calm seas. Pygmy sperm whales have
a shark-like head with a narrow underslung lower
jaw. The flippers are set high on the sides near the
head. The small falcate dorsal fin (< 5% of the
body length) is usually set well behind the midpoint
of the back.
Pygmy sperm whales are countershaded, ranging
from dark grty on the back to white below. Often
the belly has a pinkish tone. There is a light
coloured bracket mark, dubbed the “false gill,”
along the side between the eye and the flipper.
The lower jaw contains 12 to 16 (sometimes 10 or
11) pairs of long, fang-like teeth that fit into sockets
in the upper jaw. There are usually no teeth in the
upper jaw.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
Fig. 200 Skull
KOGI Kog 1       PYW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Kogiidae 
71
Can be confused with:Pygmy and dwarf sperm whales (p. 70) are somewhat difficult to distinguish at sea.
Pygmy sperm whales grow to somewhat greater total lengths, and have smaller, more rounded dorsal fins,
set farther back on the body. There is some degree of overlap in most of characteristics of these 2 species,
and identifications must be made cautiously.
Size: Adult pygmy sperm whales are 2.7 to 3.4 m long, and newborns are about 1.2 m. Adults may weigh
as much as 400 kg.
Geographical Distribution: Pygmy sperm whales are known from deep waters in tropical to warm
temperate zones of all oceans. They appear to be especially common over and near the continental slope.
Biology and Behaviour: Most sightings of pygmy sperm whales are of small groups of less than 5 or 6
individuals. Almost nothing is known of the behaviour and ecology of this species. They are rarely seen alive
at sea, but they are among the most frequently stranded small whales in some areas. When seen at sea,
they generally appear slow and sluggish, with no visible blow.
Very little is known of the reproductive biology of the pygmy sperm whale.
Studies of feeding habits, based on stomach contents of stranded animals, suggest that this species feeds
in deep water on cephalopods and, less often, on deep-sea fishes and shrimps.
Exploitation: Pygmy sperm whales have never been hunted commercially. In recent years, however, a few
have been killed in Sri Lanka’s gillnet fisheries, and it is likely they are killed in gillnets elsewhere as well.
Small numbers have been taken in coastal whaling operations off Japan and Indonesia.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 201


72
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Dwarf sperm whale; Fr - Cachalot nain; Sp - Cachalote enano.
Distinctive Characteristics: The dwarf sperm
whale is similar in appearance to the pygmy sperm
whale, but has a larger dorsal fin (> 5% of the body
length), generally set nearer the middle of the
back. Like its congener, the dwarf sperm whale
has a shark-like profile (but with a more pointed
snout than the pygmy sperm whale).
Dwarf sperm whales have grey (dorsal) to white
(ventral) coloration, and a pigment marking
shaped like a shark’s gill slit on the side of its head.
Generally, a pair of short grooves, similar to those
in beaked whales, is present on the throat.
There are 8 to 11 (rarely up to 13) pairs of teeth in
the lower jaw; sometimes teeth are present in the
upper jaw as well.
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Fig. 202 Kogia simus
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 203 Skull
Kogia simus Owen, 1866
KOGI Kog 2       DWW


Cetacea Odontoceti - Kogiidae 
73
Can be confused with: Dwarf sperm whales are most likely to be confused with pygmy sperm whales
(p. 70), which are very similar in appearance. Besides reaching smaller maximum lengths, dwarf sperm
whales have taller, more dolphin-like dorsal fins, set more toward the middle of the back. However, because
sizes overlap and dorsal fins are variable in size and position, many sightings at sea of Kogia whales may
not be identifiable to species.
Size: Adults of this species are up to 2.7 m long and may weigh up to 210 kg. Length at birth is about 1 m.
Geographical Distribution: The dwarf sperm whale, like the pygmy sperm whale, is known mostly from
strandings. It has rarely been positively identified in encounters at sea. It appears to be distributed widely
in tropical to warm temperate zones, apparently largely offshore.
Biology and Behaviour: Group sizes tend to be small, most often less than 5 individuals (although groups
of up to 10 have been recorded). This species, like the pygmy sperm whale, is also shy and undemonstrative
when observed at sea. When startled, dwarf sperm whales, and possibly pygmy sperm whales, may leave
a large rust-coloured cloud of fecal material behind as they dive.
In at least one area, there appears to be a calving peak in summer.
Dwarf sperm whales appear to feed primarily on deep-water cephalopods.
Exploitation: Some small scale catches of dwarf sperm whales have occurred in Japan and in St. Vincent
in the Lesser Antilles. Also, substantial numbers appear to be taken each year in gillnets in the Indian Ocean,
and possibly elsewhere.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 204
click for next page
