--- 
source: 2008-19.pdf
--- 

Biological Conservation 1993, 65, 9-13 
 
 
9 
  THE DECLINE OF OTTER Lutra lutra POPULATIONS IN THE 
  REGION OF THE PAYS DE LOIRE, WESTERN FRANCE 
 
Thierry Lodé 
Laboratoire d'Ethologie, Université Rennes I, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France 
 
(Received 15 June 1991; revised version received 29 June 1992; accepted 1 July 1992) 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In the Pays de Loire region of western France, a field 
survey carried out between 1984 and 1991 showed that 
otter populations decreased over 54.2% of sites and are 
now highly fragmented. In 1991 only 9.5% of 348 sites 
produced positive records compared to 20.7% in 1984. The 
decline was most notable in the larger rivers whereas the 
relative use of marsh habitat increased. Populations 
become more vulnerable when riparian vegetation de-
clines. Accidental drowning in eel Anguilla anguilla fyke 
nets appears to be the major cause of accidental mortality. 
The scarcity of otter populations is an indication of serious 
degradation of aquatic ecosystems. 
 
Key words: Western France, otters, population, habitat 
destruction. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Populations of European otters Lutra lutra L. have 
suffered serious declines over large areas of Europe, 
notably in Sweden (Erlinge, 1972a), Germany (Röben, 
1974), parts of Britain (Chanin & Jefferies, 1978), 
Belgium (Libois et al., 1982), Ireland (Chapman & 
Chapman, 1982), Portugal (Macdonald & Mason, 
1982),  Poland  (Romanowski,  1984),  Switzerland 
(Muller, 1984), Yugoslavia (Liles & Jenkins, 1984) and 
Spain (Adrian et al., 1985). 
In France, during the decade 1960/1970, the otter 
population remained apparently stable, though no 
structured surveys were carried out. Since then, despite 
being protected by law since 1972, the population 
has  steadily  declined  (Green  &  Green,  1981; 
SFEPM, 1984). The range seems to be restricted to 
the Atlantic seaboard, the Camargue and the Massif 
Central but even there the distribution is discon-
tinuous. Before 1972, hunting and trapping seemed 
to be the main causes of otter decline (Bouchardy, 
1986). Since then it has been shown that bioaccumula-
tion of toxicants (notably dieldrin, PCBs and mercury) 
is responsible for the decline of otters in several 
countries (Chanin & Jefferies, 1978; Barus & Zejda, 
1981; Chapman & Chapman, 1982; Madsen & Mason, 
 
Biological Conservation 0006-3207/93/$06.00 © 1993 Flsevier 
Science Publishers Ltd, England. Printed in Great Britain 
1987; Skarén, 1988; Rodriguez et al., 1989; Mason & 
Madsen, 1990). 
   However, our knowledge of the status of the otter is 
not accurate enough to determine why the situation has 
continued to deteriorate. This is particularly the case in 
Western France where otter surveys were unstructured 
until 1980. 
   From 1984 to 1991, a detailed survey of otter presence 
was therefore carried out, and an assessment made of 
the species' status in the Pays de Loire region (Saint-
Girons et al, 1988; Lodé et al., 1990a). An attempt was 
also made to relate the distribution of otters to environ-
mental characteristics which are likely to affect popul-
ation survival. 
 
 
STUDY AREA 
The Pays de Loire region in western France is an 
administrative district comprising five departments 
(Loire-Atlantique, Maine-et-Loire, Mayenne,  Sarthe 
and the Vendée) and covering 30 198 km2 (see Fig. 1). 
The climate is mild, being influenced by the nearby 
ocean. The average temperatures have a narrow range 
(July average 160C, January average 7.20C, calculated 
between 1968 and 1988 from the Meteorological Office 
of Nantes)  and the rainfall may reach 800 mm/year. 
The region stretches along the banks of the River Loire 
between Brittany and the Parisian Basin. The mostly 
eroded hercynian relief of the Amorican massif lies 
between the Mancelles Hills (300 m) and Signal des 
Avalloirs (417 m) in the northeast to Mont Mercure 
(285 m)  in the south.  The terrain consists of schist 
rock,  bounded by chalky plateaux in the east 
(Saumurois). The whole area is drained by numerous 
watercourses which belong to the River Loire hydro-
graphic  system.  The  landscape  is predominantly 
wooded farmland ('bocage') which is characterized by a 
patchwork of small fields surrounded by hedges often 
with pollarded oaks and ashes. Several wetlands lie 
along the Atlantic seaboard and have an international 
value for wildfowl (Brosselin, 1973). The main areas of 
marsh are (1) the Brière  Regional Nature Park peat-
bogs lying to the northwest; (2) the Guérande salt-pans 
to the northwest; (3) the Lake of Grand-Lieu, south of 
Nantes; and  (4)  the Marais Vendéen. The most south-
ern part of the Vendee, which forms a small part of 


10 
 T. Lodé 
 
 
Fig. 1. Change in otter distribution between 1984 and 1991 in Pays de Loire. Inset shows the study area. 
 
 
Marais Poitevin Regional Nature Park, is not consid-
ered here. The plateau of Saumurois and the valley of 
the River Sèvre Nantaise have vineyards. Cereal pro-
duction, fodder crops, cattle rearing and orchards are  
the main agricultural activities. 
 
METHODS 
This study was carried out between 1984 and 1991 and 
was concentrated on the sites where otters were present 
in 1984 (SFEPM, 1984; Saint-Girons et al., 1988). 
Sites were chosen for their accessibility, and would 
start, for instance, under a bridge or a substantial 
promontory. Each site was carefully searched for a 
maximum of 400 m upstream and 400 m downstream 
from the chosen access point but recording stopped as 
soon as a spraint was found on either bank.  In 1984  
and 1985, one or two searches a year per site were 
carried out, but from 1986 three searches a year were 
made in spring, autumn and winter, and  a  site was 
recorded as positive when at least one spraint, or a very 
clear footprint, was found. Other signs were not con-
sidered as sufficiently specific. Otters were presumed 
absent  if a site produced no signs during the three 
visits. Although local extinction can never be confirmed 
from negative records, the continuous absence of 
spraints at sites where they were previously recorded 
may be taken as good evidence of at least a marked 
decline in populations. Note that by carrying out three 
searches a year from 1986, whilst only two searches a 
year were made in 1984 and 1985, this will have in-
creased the likelihood of finding spraints. If an increase 
in positive records had been obtained, this increased 
sampling effort could have invalidated any conclusion 
regarding an increase in otters. However, with the de-
creasing number of positive records obtained, the extra 
search effort helps to confirm the conclusion that fewer 
sites were occupied. 
   Some habitat data and an assessment of the degree 
of pollution were recorded  at  all sites. We graded 


 
Decline of otters in W France 
11 
 
watercourses into three categories as ponds,  ditches 
and streams (width < 5 m), small rivers (width < 10 m), 
and large rivers, i.e. the Loire and direct tributaries 
(width > 10 m). The river banks at each site were 
classified on the extent of bankside vegetation as 
follows: 0, low herbaceous ground cover; 1, tall her-
baceous cover with scattered bushes; 2, irregular 
hedges; 3, continuous hedges with intermittent trees; 4, 
tree-covered bankside; 5, forest watercourses. Aquatic 
macrophytes were also recorded as an indicator of 
pollution (Haury, 1990) and compared with the water 
quality map (Agence de Bassin Loire-Bretagne, 1985). 
The χ2 test was used to compare changes in frequency 
of records between years but some categories had few 
records and were therefore combined. Known cases of 
otter accidental mortality between 1984 and 1991 were 
listed. 
 
RESULTS 
Of the 348 sites surveyed in 1984, throughout the whole 
Pays de Loire region, 72 sites (20.7%) showed evidence 
of otters 50% in Loire-Atlantique, 316% in the 
Vendée and 13.9% in the other eastern departments 
(Fig. 1). In 1991, only 33 (9.60/0) of the sites surveyed 
showed evidence of otters. Thus, we concluded that 
otters had disappeared from 54.2% of the sites occupied 
in 1984 and populations had become more fragmented 
(Table 1). The decline averaged 7.7% sites per year, 
with the lowest decreases in 1988 and 1991. The distri-
bution of the species decreased from east to west, the 
most frequented parts in 1991 being the marshes of 
Brière, Lake of Grand-Lieu and adjoining Rivers 
Marais-Vendeens, and a diffuse area in the Vendée. 
Note that if only two searches had been carried out, 
as in 1984 and 1985 then the indicated percentage 
reduction in occupied sites may well have been even 
greater than that shown here as a result of increasing 
the search effort (see Methods above). 
Between 1984 and 1991, evidence of otters strongly 
decreased on the Loire and its direct tributaries, while 
marshes, including the Lake of Grand-Lieu and ponds, 
produced 60.6% of all positive records (Table 2, χ2 = 
7.936, p < 0.05). 
The study of bankside cover showed that otters have 
survived better in the more wooded areas (Table 3). 
There was an increase in otter signs on banksides with 
continuous hedges and trees. On the other hand, bank-
sides with tall herbaceous cover and scattered bushes 
showed a decrease in otter signs (χ2 =  6.435, p < 0.05). 
Otters clearly avoided polluted waters with no 
significant change between surveys (χ2 = 1.567, p > 0.05) 
(Table 4). In 1984 and 1991, otter signs were found 
respectively  in  90.3% and 96.9%  of sites with 
average or good-quality water. 
Table 5 presents the data of known cases of otter 
mortality between 1984 and 1991. The sample is very 
small (n =  15) but shows that drowning accidents due 
to eel Anguilla anguilla fyke nets could be the main 
cause of accidental mortality. 
 
Table 1. Changes in otter records on 348 sites surveyed in the 
                                       Pays de Loire 
 
1984 1985/86 1987 1988 1989/90 1991 
Positive sites 
 72 
   60 
 48 
 44 
   35 
 33 
Positive site  
    frequency (%) 
20.7 
17.2 
13.8 12.6 
10.1 
9.5 
Annual decline (%) 
 
16.7 
20.0 
8.0 
20.5 
5.7 
 
 
 
Table 2. Records of otters (spraints or footprints) in different 
habitats 
                      Ponds         Marshes     Streams   Small     Loire and 
                                  (+Grand-Lieu)                  rivers    tributaries 
1984 
   (n = 72) 
5 
22 
9 
20 
16 
 
27 
29 
 
1991 
   (n = 13) 
3 
17 
3 
9 
1 
 
20 
12 
 
Relative 
   change (%) 
+23.1 
-3.9 
-19.2 
 
 
Table 3. Occurrence of otters in relation to different types of 
bankside vegetationa 
 
Herbaceous        Irregular 
   Wooded 
       cover 
 hedges 
  banksides 
 
(0) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3)   (4)    (5) 
1984 (n = 72)                   4        15            43             6      3      1 
 
             19                                         10 
1991 (n = 33) 
0 
3             20 
  7      2      1 
 
       3 
 
       10 
Relative change (%)            -17.3              +0.9 
     +16.4 
 
a 0, low herbaceous ground cover; 1, tall herbaceous cover 
with scattered bushes; 2, irregular hedges; 3, continuous 
hedges with intermittent trees; 4, tree-covered bankside; 5, 
forest watercourses. 
 
 
Table 4. Occurrence of otters in relation to water quality 
                                   Very bad    Polluted    Average      Good 
1984 (n = 72)                                  7 
39 
26 
1991 (n = 33)                    
 1 
18 
14 
Relative change (%)          
-6.7 
+0.3 
+6.3 
 
 
Table 5. Accidental  causes of otter mortalty between 1984 and 
1991 in Pays de Loire 
 
Accidental 
Drowning in 
     Road kills 
 
traps 
eel fyke nets 
Male 
1 (young) 
         2 (young) 
    2 (adult) 
Female                                    2 (young), 2 (adult)       1 (young) 
Unknown 
2                               2                               1 
% 
20                              53.3                         26.7 
 


12                
T. Lodé 
 
DISCUSSION 
In some areas of Britain otters show seasonal variation in 
spraint frequency with a winter maximum (Kruuk et al., 
1986; Kruuk & Conroy, 1987; Mason & Macdonald, 
1987). On the other hand, in Portugal Macdonald and 
Mason (1982) noted a higher spraint frequency in 
summer, and Palomares et al. (1988) in Spain noticed 
large fluctuations but no seasonal trend. When  otters  
are at low densities, the frequency of spraints may also 
be very low (Macdonald, 1983). Otter spraints cannot 
provide information on otter abundance, only about 
distribution  (Jenkins & Burrow, 1980; Conroy & 
French, 1987; Mason & Macdonald, 1987). 
Throughout most of the region, the reduced distribu-
tion of otter signs, and the apparent fragmentation of 
populations, suggests that otters are endangered. The 
status of the species is undoubtedly affected by a com-
bination of factors. Changes in otter distribution varied 
from habitat to habitat. The decline  was most  notable  
in the larger rivers whereas the importance of marshes 
was clearly apparent. Riparian engineering works were 
frequently conducted in these larger rivers especially on 
the Sèvres, and the Erdre. The vulnerability of otter 
populations becomes more pronounced as riparian veg-
etation decreases and the less vegetated sites are more 
frequently deserted. Several authors have stressed the 
importance of vegetation cover for maintaining otters 
(Macdonald et al., 1978; Jenkins & Burrow, 1980; 
Blanchon, 1983; Bas et al. 1984; Adriàn et al. 1985). 
Otters utilise between 15 and 20 km of linear bank side 
(Erlinge, 1968; Green et al. 1984) and may  need  
several diurnal resting holts (Green et al., 1984; R. 
Rosoux, pers. comm.) often located under larger trees 
(Macdonald et al., 1978; Harper, 1981). 
In the Pays de Loire, otters mainly frequent natural 
eutrophic environments where cyprinids and eels consti-
tute the major food component of its diet (Lodé, 1989), 
and eels are important in the diet elsewhere (Fairley, 
1972; Jenkins et aL, 1979; Adrian & Delibes, 1987; Libois 
& Rosoux, 1989). Mason and Lodé (1992) have recorded 
generally low concentrations of pesticide residues in otter 
spraints in the Pays de Loire. Pollution can reduce fish 
stocks (Leynaud, 1976) and thus reduce the food supply 
of otters. Maizeret et al. (1981) estimated that otters need 
a minimum of 30 kg fish biomass per km of river. Otters 
also feed on muskrats Onnatra zibethieus, in winter, and 
these made up 6% of the diet in the Lake of Grand-Lieu 
(Lodé, 1989). Poisoning campaigns conducted against 
muskrats and coypus Myocastor coypus in numerous 
wetlands in the region coincided with a reduction in otter 
distribution (Lodé et al. 1990a). 
Otters may be victims of trap setting for muskrats 
(Braun, 1985), but accidental drowning in eel nets 
appeared to be more important, especially in the  Lake  
of Grand-Lieu. Casualties were chiefly females and 
juveniles. Fish nets are known to cause serious otter 
mortality (Fairley, 1972; Frlinge, 1 972a; Chapman & 
Chapman, 1982) and Jefferies et al. (1984) considered 
that fish traps can reduce otter populations when they  
are set for long periods in single localities. 
 
Various authors have tried to evaluate the potential 
competition between otter and feral American mink 
Mustela vison but concluded that any dietary overlap is 
small (Erlinge, 1972,b; Jenkins & Harper, 1980; Chanin, 
1981; Wise et al., 1981). Feral American mink have  
only just reached the north-west of the region (Lodé et 
al., 1990b). 
Although the authorities in the region have been in-
formed since 1985 on the decline  in otter populations, 
no serious conservation measures have been taken. A 
real political will for environmental conservation is  
now needed before further losses occur. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks are due to D. Le Jacques, F. Desprez, L. Gui-
hard, B. Guillemot, F. Ibanez, M. Harrouet, B. Teillet,  
P. Pailley, D. Pourreau, and C. Redou for help in the 
searches. We are grateful to Dr B. N. K. Davis and the 
referees  who  provided  helpful  criticisms  of the 
manuscript. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Adriàn, M. I. & Delibes, M. (1987). Food habits of the otter 
Lutra lutra in two habitats of the Donana National Park,   
SW Spain. J. Zool. Lond., 212, 399-406. 
Adriàn, M. I., Wilden, W. & Delibes, M. (1985). Otter distri--
bution and agriculture in Southwestern Spain. Congr. Int. 
Union Game BioL, 18th, Brussels, 17-21 September 1985, 
519-26. 
Agence de Bassin Loire-Bretagne (1985). Carte de la qualité 
des cours d'eau. Institut Geographique National, Nantes. 
Barus, V. & Zejda, J. (1981). The European otter Lutra lutra 
L. in the Czech Socialist Republic. Acta Sci. Nat. Brna, 
15(12), 1-41. 
Bas, N., Jenkins, D. & Rothery, P. (1984). Ecology of otters   
in northern Scotland, V. The distribution of otter Lutra   
lutra faeces in relation to bankside vegetation on the River 
Dee in summer 1981. J appl. Ecol., 21, 507-13. 
Blanchon, J. J. (1983). Statut de Ia loutre sur la basse valleé 
de la Bouzanne. Rapport Direction Départmentale de 
I'Agriculture, and Direction Régionale de l'Architecture et de 
l'Environnement Centre. 
Bouchardy, C. (1986). La loutre. Sang de Ia Terre, Paris. 
Braun, A. J. (1985). Cause de mortalité chez la loutre  
d'Europe Lutra lutra. Bull Groupe Loutres, 19, 1-4. 
Brosselin, M. (1973). Valeur internationale pour l'avifaune 
migratrice des zones humides de la façade occidentale de la 
France. Penn Ar Bed, 74, 185-94. 
Chanin, P. R. F. (1981). The diet of the otter and its relation 
with the feral mink in two areas of SW England. Acta 
Theriol., 26(5), 83-95. 
Chanin, P. R. F. & Jelferies, D. J. (1978). The decline of the 
otter Lutra lutra L. in Britain: An analysis of hunting  
records and discussion of causes. Biol J. Linn. Soc. Land., 
10, 305-28. 
Chapman, P. J. & Chapman, L. L. (1982). Otter survey of 
Ireland, 1980/1981. Vincent Wildlife Trust, London. 
Conroy, J. W. H. & French, D.D. (1987). The use of spraints  
to monitor populations of otters Lutra lutra L. Symp. Zool. 
Soc. Lond., 58, 247-62. 
Erlinge, 5. (1968). Territoriality of the otter Lutra lutra. Oikos, 
19, 81-98. 
Erlinge, S. (1972a). The situation of the otter population in 
Sweden. Viltrevy, 8, 379-97. 
Erlinge, S. (1972b). Interspecific relations between otter Lutra


 
Decline of otters in W. France 
13 
 
lutra L. and mink Mustela vison Schreber in Sweden. 
Oikos, 23, 327-35. 
Fairley, J. S. (1972). Food of the otters Lutra lutra from Co. 
Gaiway, Ireland and notes on other aspects of their biology. 
f Zool. Lond., 166, 469-74. 
Green, J. & Green, R. (1981). The otter Lutra lutra L. in 
Western France. Mammal Rev., 11, 181-7. 
Green, J., Green, R & Jefferies, D. J. (1984). A radiotracking 
survey of otters Lutra lutra on a Perthshire river system. 
Lutra, 27, 85-145. 
Harper, R. J. (1981). Sites of three otter Lutra lutra breeding 
holts in fresh water habitats. J. ZooL Lond., 195, 5546. 
Haury, J. (1990). Macrophytes du Trieux (Bretagne nord),   
III. Relations macrophytesqualites des eaux. Bull. Soc.     
Sci. NaL Ouest France, 12(4), 141-54. 
Jefferies, D. J., Green, J. & Green, R. (1984). Commercial fish 
and crustacean traps: A serious cause of otter Lutra lutra L. 
mortality in Britain and Europe. Vincent Wildlife Trust, 
London. 
Jenkins, D. & Burrow, J. D. (1980). Ecology of otters in 
northern Scotland, III. The use of faeces as indicators of 
otter Lutra lutra density and distribution. J. Anim. EcoL,   
49, 755-74. 
Jenkins, D. & Harper, R. J. (1980). Ecology of otters in 
northern Scotland: Analysis of otter Lutra lutra and mink 
Mustela vison faeces from Deeside, NE Scotland in 
1977/1978. J. Anim. Ecol., 49, 737-54. 
Jenkins, D., Walker, J. G. K. & MacCowan, D. (1979). 
Analysis of otter Lutra lutra faeces from Deeside, North 
East Scotland. J. Zool. Lond., 187, 23544. 
Kruuk, H., Conroy, J. W. H., Glinnrveen, V. & Ouwerkerk, E. 
J. (1986). The use of spraints to survey populations of   
otters Lutra lutra. Biol. Conserv., 35, 187-94. 
Kruuk, H. & Conroy, J. W. H. (1987). Surveying otter Lutra 
lutra populations: A discussion of problems with spraints. 
Biol. Conserv., 41, 179-83. 
Leynaud, G. (1976). Effets toxiques des pollutions sur la 
faune piscicole. In La pollution des eaux continentales, ed. 
P. Pesson, Gauthiers-Villard, Paris, pp.13440. 
Libois, R. M., Philippart, J. C., Rosoux, R. & Vranken, M. 
(1982). Quel avenir pour Ia loutre en Belgique? Cahiers 
EthoL AppI., 2, 1-15. 
Libois, R. M. & Rosoux, R. (1989). Ecologie de la loutre 
Lutra lutra dans le Marais Poitevin, 1. Etude de la consom-
mation d'anguilles. Vie & Milieu, 39, 191-7. 
Liles, G. & Jenkins, L. (1984). A field survey for otters Lutra 
lutra in Yugoslavia. J. Zool. Lond., 203, 282-4. 
Lodé, T. (1989). La loutre en Loire-Atlantique: Note prélim-
inaire sur l'évo1ution recente des populations, 1'alimentation 
et le comportement predateur de Lutra lutra L. 1758. BulL 
Soc. Sci. NaL Ouest France, 11(2), 69-76. 
Lodé, T. et al. (1990a). Evolution recente des populations de 
Ia loutre d'Europe Lutra lutra dans la Région des Pays de 
Loire. Bull. Erminea sp., Nantes. 
Lodé, T., Pondaven, M. & Le Jacques, D. (1990b). Note 
preliminaire sur Ia biologie du vison d'Amerique Mustela 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vison Schreber dans 1'Ouest de Ia France. Bull Soc. Sci. 
Nat. Ouest France, 12(4), 13740. 
Macdonald, S. M. (1983). The status of the otter in the   
British Isles. Mammal Rev., 13,11-23. 
Macdonald, S. M. & Mason, C. F. (1982). The otter Lutra 
lutra in Central Portugal. Biol. Conserv., 22, 207-215. 
Macdonald, S. M., Mason, C. F. & Coghill, I. 5. (1978). The 
otter and its conservation in the river Teme catchment. J. 
appL Ecol., 15, 373-84. 
Madsen, A. B. & Mason, C. F. (1987). Cadmium, lead         
and mercury in hair from Danish otters Lutra lutra. Nat. 
Jutland., 22(3), 814. 
Maizeret, C., Camby, A., Gross, F. & Delarche, A. (1981). 
Determination des causes de rarc~ faction de Ta loutre 
Lutra lutra. Etude me thodologique sur un ruisseau du sud 
ouest de Ta France. BulL Groupe Loutres, 6, 4-10. 
Mason, C. F. & Macdonald, S. M. (1987). The use of   
spraints for surveying otter Lutra lutra populations. Biol 
Conserv., 41, 167-77. 
Mason, C. F. & Madsen, A. B. (1990). Mortality and condi-
tion in otters Lutra lutra from Denmark and Great Britain. 
NaL Jutland., 22(14), 217-20. 
Mason, C. F. & Lodé, T. (1992). Analyse de Ta concentration 
des résidus de pesticides organochlorés et PCBs présents 
dans les fèces de la  loutre dans la région des Pays de Loire. 
Bull. Soc. Sci. Nat. Ouest, France, 14(4), 9-13. 
Müller, H. J. (1984). Otters Lutra lutra in Switzerland. Bull 
Groupe Loutres, 18, 214. 
Palomares, G., Delibes, M., Adriàn, M. I., Rodriguez, A. & 
Moreno, 5. (1988). Variaci6n estacional de Ia frecuencia de 
marcaje con heces por Lutra lutra in el bajo Guadalquivir, 
suroeste des Espaila. Actas CoL Luso-Esp. EcoL Bacias 
Hydrogr. e Rec. Zool., 313-18. 
Röben, P. (1974). Zum Vorkommen des Otters Lutra lutra L. 
1758 in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Saugetierk. Mittl., 
1, 28-38. 
Rodriguez, A., Adriàn, M. I., Delibes, M., Palomares, F. & 
Grona, P. (1989). Habitat, uso del suelo y situaci6n de Ta 
nutria Lutra lutra en Ta Cuenca Baja del rio Guadalquivir, 
suroeste de Espalia. Actas Col. Luso-Esp. Ecol. Bacias 
Hydrogr. e Rec. Zool., 343-9. 
Romanowski, J. (1984). Wystepowanie wydry Lutra lutra 
Linneaus 1758 w Polsce w swietle wyniklw ankiety dla 
mysliwych. Teriologia, 28(1), 87-91. 
Saint-Girons, M. C., Lodé, T. & Nicolau-Guillaumet, P. 
(1988). Atlas des mammifères terrestres de Loire-
Atlantique. Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris. 
SEFPM (1984). Atlas des mammifères sauvages de France. 
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris. 
Skàren, U. (1988). Chlorinated hydrocarbons. PCBs and 
Cesium isotopes in otters Lutra lutra from Central Finland. 
Ann. Zool. Fennici, 25, 2716. 
Wise, M. H., Linn, I. J. & Kennedy, C. R. (1981). A compar-
ison of the feeding biology of mink Mustela vison and otter 
Lutra lutra. J. ZooL Lund., 195,181-213. 
 
