--- 
source: 2009.pdf
--- 

 
North Lanarkshire Biodiversity Action Plan: Otter. 2008 Update. 
Otter Action Plan 
Lutra lutra 
 
UK List of Priority Species:  
 
 
 
 
Yes 
Scottish Biodiversity List:  
 
 
 
 
Yes 
 
Summary 
 
The otter is widespread in North Lanarkshire and is found in nearly all suitable 
waterways. With continuing efforts to improve water quality the population of 
Otters should increase further, as all suitable habitat is occupied. 
 
Species Profile 
 
Otters require clean rivers with a plentiful supply of food and bankside 
vegetation. They are shy, semi-aquatic, mostly nocturnal creatures, although 
they can be seen during the day in undisturbed locations.  Their fur is 
generally medium to dark brown in colour with a pale underbelly. Adults vary 
from 1-1.2 metres in length, and 6-8kg in weight. Females are generally 
smaller than males. They are found in almost all wetland habitats including 
lochs, rivers, burns, ditches, reedbeds, marshes, estuaries and the coast.  
 
An otter needs up to 30 holts (dens) or lying up sites in their home range. 
Large cavities in bankside tree roots, dense impenetrable scrub, rock cavities, 
peat burrows and old culverts are all examples of typical holt sites. One of the 
best ways to identify a possible holt is to look for their droppings known as 
spraints which are black and spiky and have fish bones in them. Footprints 
and runs are also good indicators of an otter’s presence.  
 
Their main diet is fish, with eels being a favourite, although they will eat 
amphibians (frogs are an important food source in spring), small mammals 
and some birds. An adult otter requires about 1kg of food a day. This high 
value is due to the amount of energy used hunting their aquatic prey.  
 
Breeding is non-seasonal; therefore they can breed at any time of the year. 
The female gives birth to one to four cubs in the safest holt in her home range. 
The cubs remain there for about 2 months and then begin exploring their 
territory with their mother. They will stay with her for 12 to 18 months before 
finding their own territory (the father plays no role in rearing the cubs). They 
are sexually mature at two years but life expectancy is short, three years on 
average, although their potential life expectancy is up to fifteen years.  Late 
sexual maturity, small litter size and a short life expectancy make breeding 
success critical. 
 
Current Status 
 
The Eurasian otter has the widest distribution of all otter species. Its range 
covers parts of three continents: Europe, Asia (as far south as Java) and 
North Africa. Originally the species was widespread throughout Europe, after 


 
North Lanarkshire Biodiversity Action Plan: Otter. 2008 Update. 
the population crashes in the 1960-70’s it declined in Central and Northern 
Europe and is probably extinct in the Netherlands and Switzerland. The 
population crash was largely due to pollution from farm pesticides and habitat 
loss. By the late 1970s the otter was almost extinct in the UK apart from a few 
strongholds in Scotland such as Dumfries and Galloway and the Highlands 
and Islands. However, by the 1980s otter populations had begun to recover 
due to the phasing out and banning of some hydrocarbon pesticides.  
 
There are still good populations in Portugal, Ireland, Greece, Scotland and the 
northern taiga of Russia. However, over its whole range the Otter is estimated 
to have declined by at least 20%. 
 
The Scottish population is one of the largest populations in Europe and as the 
inland populations expand this population is being further bolstered. This 
makes our population significant in Europe, and globally. 
 
During 2003 a total of 24 10km squares were surveyed for otters within 
Strathclyde & Ayrshire. 59 out of 71 (83.10%) survey sites from within these 
squares were positive. This compares with only 23.94% positive in 1978–79, 
29.58% positive in 1985–86 and 48.19% positive in 1991–94, representing a 
substantial improvement over the last decade.  Otters are now found in nearly 
all lochs, rivers and burns in the area.    
 
 
Legal Status 
 
The otter is listed on Appendix I of CITES, Appendix II of the Bern Convention 
and Annexes II & IV of the Habitats Directive. It is also protected under 
Schedule 5 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended) and 
Schedule 2 of the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Regulations 1994, and 
the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004. 
 
This protection means that it is an offence to deliberately: kill or injure otters, 
capture or keep otters, destroy, damage or obstruct their den, disturb them 
while in the den, sell or advertise for sale, otters and anything derived from 
them, import or export otters, whether dead or alive 
 
The above actions can only be carried out with a specially granted licence, 
issued by SNH. 
 
Current Factors Affecting This Species 
 
• Pollution of watercourses from industrial, residential and agricultural 
sources. Industrial and residential pollution of watercourses is a major 
issue in the Coatbridge and Airdrie area. 
• Existing developments without Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems 
increasing the run-off going into the drains, overloading the sewage 
system so that uses the emergency overflows to discharge directly into 
water courses. 
• Habitat loss due to development. 


 
North Lanarkshire Biodiversity Action Plan: Otter. 2008 Update. 
• Acidification of watercourses caused by acid rain and exacerbated by 
leachate from conifer plantations. 
• Disturbance is still a major factor as waterways are increasingly used for 
recreation; people and dogs can cause major problems in some places. 
 
Current Action 
 
• Scottish Water’s upgrading of the sewage infrastructure, leading to 
improved water quality.  
• North Lanarkshire Councils Fantastic Freshwater education and 
awareness scheme. 
• Scottish Environmental Protection Agency’s monitoring of water quality at 
selected sites locally. 
• Ongoing collation of Otter roadkill records. 
• All developments affecting otter habitat are recommended to have an otter 
survey undertaken prior to development. 
 
Proposed Objectives, Targets and Actions 
 
1. Conserve and enhance otter habitat. 
2. Maintain and where possible expand the otter population in North 
Lanarkshire. 
 
Action 
Meets 
objective 
number 
Action by 
Target 
Site and species safeguard and management 
1.1 Attempt to limit accidental deaths by 
providing road underpasses, dyke net 
guards etc 
2 
NLC, SG, SNH 
Identify key areas by end of 
2010.  Implement appropriate 
preventative measures by 
end of 2013. 
1.2.  Identify and mitigate any pollution 
issues that may be limiting populations. 
2 
NLC, SG, 
SEPA, SNH 
Identify areas by end of 2010.  
Implement appropriate 
preventative measures by 
end of 2013. 
Advisory 
2.1 Advise owners and seek to secure 
appropriate management of otter sites.  
1 
FWAG, SNH, 
SEPA, SWT, 
NFU, SLF 
3 otter related grant funded 
projects annually. 
Research and monitoring 
 
 
 
3.1 Monitor otter populations in key 
areas. 
1,2 
SWT, NLC, 
SNH 
Annual survey. 
 
Communications and publicity 
4.1 Use this popular species to highlight 
the importance of water quality 
1,2 
NLC 
One themed talk, walk, leaflet 
or article annually. 
 
Plan written by Heather Dunsmore and Andrew Jones (Scottish Wildlife Trust). Updated by 
Jonathan Willet (Biodiversity Officer) 2004.  Reviewed and updated by Laura Whyte 
(Biodiversity Officer) 2008. 
