--- 
source: 2010 Oh.pdf
--- 

Introduction
Home range variation in mammals is influenced by 
a number of natural factors including sex, body mass, 
intra- and interspecific competition, population density, 
mating system, and prey abundance and distribution 
(Delany 1982, Sandell 1989, Benson et al. 2006). Recently, 
human activities such as agriculture, forestry, industry, 
urbanization and recreation have severely affected natural 
ecosystems (Vitousek et al. 1997). Various anthropogenic 
factors affect the home ranges of wild mammals. For 
example, paved roads are effective barriers to the mobility 
of small mammals (Mader 1984), and paved roads have 
been shown to prevent dispersal by badgers (Clarke et 
al. 1998). Urbanization also affects the movement of 
mammals. Home range sizes of raccoons are smaller 
in urban areas than in rural areas (Prange et al. 2004). 
Introduced or invasive species have also extended their 
home ranges into new habitats (Delany 1982).
The leopard cat, Prionailurus bengalensis, is a 
small felid widely distributed throughout Asia, and 
is classified into 11 subspecies with different habitats 
and characteristics. P. b. euptilurus is distributed in the 
Manchurian region of China, the Russian Far East, Korea, 
and the Tsushima islands in Japan (Nowell and Jackson 
1996). In Japan, the Tsushima leopard cat is found only 
on Tsushima Islands. The average body weight is 3.55 
± 0.43 kg (mean ± SD) for males and 3.15 ± 0.40 kg for 
females, and the head and body length is 3, 569.00 ± 41.09 
mm for males and 523.27 ± 32.46 mm for females, with 
a tail length of, 245.00 ± 20.14 mm for males and 223.70 
J. Ecol. Field Biol. 33 (1): 3-13, 2010
DOI:10.5141/JEFB.2010.33.1.003
[Special Feature]
Effects of Human Activities on Home Range Size and Habitat use 
of the Tsushima leopard Cat Prionailurus bengalensis euptilurus in a 
Suburban Area on the Tsushima Islands, Japan
Dae-Hyun Oh
1, 2*, Shusaku Moteki
1,3, Nozomi Nakanish
1 and Masako Izawa
1
1 Laboratory of Ecology and Systematics, Faculty of Science, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0213, Japan
2 Ecosystem Assessment Division, Ecology Research Department, National Institute of Environmental Research, Incheon 404-708, Korea
3Tsushima Wildlife Conservation Center, Ministry of the Environment, Saozaki Park, Nagasaki 817-1603, Japan
ABSTRACT: The Tsushima leopard cat, Prionailurus bengalensis euptilurus, a small felid, inhabits only the Tsushima Islands 
in Japan. Previous studies of the Tsushima leopard cat revealed that natural factors; including sex, reproductive activity, 
season, and prey distribution and abundance affect leopard cat home range variation and habitat use. In this study, we 
focused on clarifying how anthropogenic factors influenced home range variation and habitat use of a male Tsushima 
leopard cat living near a suburban area in January, March, May and September 2005 using radio-tracking. The home 
range size (100% MCP) of this cat was 0.78 ± 0.26 km
2 (mean ± SD, n = 4 tracking sessions) across the whole study period. 
However, the cat did not use all parts of its home range uniformly; rather it used some habitat types selectively. The cat 
avoided agriculture areas and residential areas in all of the tracking-sessions. On the other hand, the cat showed a weak 
preference for artificial structures and a strong preference for baiting sites in January and March, while it avoided them in 
May, and no baiting site was included in its home range in September. These results suggest that anthropogenic factors 
influenced the ranging patterns and habitat use of the leopard cat living near a suburban area. Artificial structures might 
provided good resting spaces for the cat in bad weather. When the density of its main prey was low in the winter, the cat 
tended to rely on artificial prey and had a small home range size.
Key words: baiting, home range, leopard cat, radio-tracking, Tsushima Islands
*Corresponding author: Phone: +82-2-3277-4513, e-mail: daehyun.oh@gmail.com


4      Dae-Hyun Oh et al.	
	
J. Ecol. Field Biol. 33 (1)
± 21.62 mm for females (Izawa and Nakanishi 2009). 
The Tsushima leopard cat’s preferred habitat is forest or 
grassland habitats (Izawa et al. 1991). The population of 
Tsushima leopard cats in Japan was estimated as 250-
300 individuals in the 1970s (Yamaguchi and Urata 
1970). However, the Ministry of the Environment of 
Japan reported estimated population sizes of only 88-
126 individuals in the 1980s, 70-90 individuals in the 
1990s and 80-110 individuals in the 2000s (Japan Wildlife 
Research Center 2005). The conspicuous population 
decline is thought to have been caused by habitat loss 
and fragmentation, traffic accidents, diseases from 
domestic cats, and attacks by domestic dogs. This cat was 
listed as legally protected as CR (Critically Endangered) 
in the Japanese RDB Categories by Ministry of the 
Environment, Japan in 2007 and was one of four species 
designated as National Endangered Species in Japan in 
1994 (Izawa and Nakanishi 2009).
Previous studies of ranging in the Tsushima leopard 
cat have revealed that natural factors affect home range 
size variation. For example, male leopard cats have larger 
home range than females, and the male leopard cats tend 
to expand their home ranges during the rutting season 
(Izawa et al. 2009). Conversely, female home range sizes 
shrink during the period when they nurse their kittens 
(Doi et al. 2005). Home ranges of same-sex adults do not 
overlap, male and female ranges may overlap (Maekawa 
1998, Ueno 2004). 
About 90% of the land in the Tsushima Islands is 
forested. However, urbanization and land development 
are increasing, placing pressure on wild animals in the 
Tsushima islands. 
However, no studies of ranging in the leopard cat 
to date have evaluated the effects of anthropogenic 
factors on cat movement and space use. In this study, 
we quantified home range variation and habitat use in a 
Tsushima leopard cat living in a suburban area. 
Study area
The Tsushima Islands (708.3 km
2, N 34°05´-34°42´, 
E 120°10´-129°30´) are located between Kyushu (Japan) 
and the Korean Peninsula (Fig. 1). The human population 
of the islands was reported as 38,481 in 2005 (Tsushima 
population database 2005, Tsushima city hall). The 
Tsushima Islands are in the Temperate Zone, with mean 
Fig. 1. Location and vegetation map of the Tsushima Islands. The vegetation map was created from “The 6
th National survey on the 
natural environment, Vegetation Survey Biodiversity Center, Nature Conservation Bureau, Ministry of the Environment”.


March 2010	
Home range and habitat use of the leopard cat      5
annual precipitation of 1,198 mm and mean annual 
temperature of 15.4°C (Maximum 32.4°C in August 
and Minimum -6.2°C in December) in 2005 (Weather 
statistical information 2005, Japan Meteorological 
Agency). The forests on the islands are mostly secondary 
forests (genus Castanopsis and Quercus serrata – 
Platycarya strobilacea community) and plantations 
(Cryptomeria japonica and Chamaecyparis obtuse), 
and occupy approximately 89% of the islands, while 
agricultural fields cover approximately 3% of the land 
area on the islands (Fig. 1).
This study was conducted in the Sago area on the 
northwestern part of the islands (Fig. 1). The Sago area 
consists of a village, agricultural areas (mainly rice paddy 
fields), grasslands, rivers, and deciduous, evergreen and 
coniferous forests. The population of the Sago area was 
206 in September, 2005 (Tsushima population database 
2005, Tsushima city hall). Local residents work in 
agriculture, forestry, fisheries and tourism. There are 
free-ranging domestic cats and dogs in the area, and 
domesticated fowl are kept in coops in villages. Most 
human activities and traffic increases in the morning and 
decreases at night. The Tsushima Wildlife Conservation 
Center (TWCC) was established in Saozaki Park near 
the study area in 1997. Many tourists visiting TWCC and 
Saozaki Park drive through the study area during the 
daytime. Bait for the Tsushima leopard cat is provided 
five times/week by NPO at two sites in the southern and 
northern parts of study area. 
Methods
Radio-collared Tsushima leopard cat
An adult male Tsushima leopard cat attacked 
domesticated chickens and was captured by a farmer on 
22 November, 2004. The captured cat was anesthetized 
with an intramuscular injection of a ketamine-
medetomidine mixture by the staff veterinarian of the 
Tsushima Wildlife Conservation Center. Subsequently, 
the cat was weighed, its external features were measured, 
its age was estimated, its sex was determined and the 
cat was fitted with radio-collar (weight 48 g, Advanced 
Telemetry Systems, Minnesota, USA). After a brief 
period in captivity at the Tsushima Wildlife Conservation 
Center, the cat was released near the capture point on 13 
December, 2004. At the time of capture, the leopard cat 
had a body mass of 2,960 g, a head and body length of 
535 mm, and a tail length of 255 mm. 
Radio-tracking
Radio-tracking was carried out at intervals of 1 
hour for 7-10 consecutive days from 13 to 20 January, 
from19 to 26 March, from 17 to 25 May and from 11 to 
19 September 2005. The location of the radio-collared 
cat was fixed using a Yagi-type antenna (Arukitek Co. 
Ltd. Japan) and a portable receiver (FT-290mkII, Yaesu 
Musen Co. Ltd. Japan). The location of the cat during 
each sampling interval was estimated by two or more 
directional bearings obtained from known sites (White 
and Garrot 1990a) and recorded using a handheld GPS 
(Garmin Ltd. USA). Tracking of the cat was continued 
until its recorded home range did not expand any more. 
The status of the cat was determined by a change in radio 
signal strength as being “Active” or “Resting”. Home 
range size (HRS) was analyzed using the 100% Minimum 
Convex Polygon method (MCP, Mohr 1947). The daily 
movement range (DMR) was calculated for each 24-hour 
tracking period using the 100% MCP. In addition, the 
total daily movement distance (DMD) was calculated as 
the cumulative distance between consecutive locations 
obtained within one hour during each 24-hour tracking 
period. DMRs and DMDs were calculated only when 
more than 12 locations were obtained in a day. 
Analysis of habitat use
The habitat was categorized into eight types: 
agriculture areas, coniferous forests, deciduous forests, 
evergreen forests, baiting sites, grassland, residential 
Table 1. Habitat types in study area 
Habitat type 
Contents 
Agricultural area 
Coniferous forest
Deciduous forest
Evergreen forest
Baiting site
Grassland
Residential area
Artificial structures
dry fields, rice fields 
plantations (Cryptomeria japonica, Chamaecyparis obtuse)
genus Quercus, genus Platycarya 
genus Castanopsis, genus Machilus
NPO members regularly feed chicken pieces to the leopard cat 
genus Miscanthus, genus Phragmites 
villages
shrine, graveyard


6      Dae-Hyun Oh et al.	
	
J. Ecol. Field Biol. 33 (1)
areas and artificial structures using a digitized vegetation 
map (1:25,000, Japan Wildlife Research Center 1998) 
and the Loas and Biotas (Ecological Software Solutions, 
Switzerland) (Table 1). “Artificial structures” include 
constructions outside of village areas, including shrines 
and graveyards. As we assume that the cat was attracted 
to the bait when the cat was within 25 m of the baiting 
site, we considered the baiting site as being comprised of 
a circular area of 25 m radius. 
Habitat use was analyzed by the chi-square test for 
goodness-of-fit of utilized to available habitat types (Neu 
et al. 1974, Byers et al. 1984, White and Garrot 1990b, 
Kiyota et al. 2004, 2005). If a significant difference was 
recognized between expected and observed utilization 
frequencies, we calculated Bonferroni confidence 
intervals to determine which habitat types were preferred 
or avoided (Byers et al 1984, Kiyota et al. 2005). To 
estimate the magnitude of the habitat preference, 
we calculated the Ivlev’s electivity index (Ivlev 1961; 
Steinheim 2005). 
Results
We obtained a total of 495 radio-locations (68.8% of 
720 trials) during a total of 720 hours of tracking time, 
including 141 radio-locations (83.9% of trials) in January, 
138 (82.1% of trials) in March, 120 (62.5% of trials) in 
May and 96 (50.0% of trials) in September. The cat’s 
activity was recorded as “Active” at 172 locations (34.7%) 
and “Resting” at 323 (65.3%) locations. The radio-tracked 
cat was active mostly at night, which comprised 77.0% 
of “Active” locations in January, 73.0% in March, 85.3% 
in May and 80.0% in September (Fig. 2). Nighttime was 
defined as the period from sunset to sunrise, or from 
17:00 to 07:00 in January and March and from 18:00 to 
0600 in May and September. The proportion of “Active” 
locations increased after 17:00 and decreased after 
08:00 in January and March. In May and September, it 
increased after 18:00 and began to decrease between 6:00 
and 7:00. There were two or three peaks of activity during 
the night on each tracking-session. 
The HRS of the cat averaged 0.78 ± 0.26 km2 (mean 
± SD, n = 4 tracking sessions) during the study period. 
HRS varied among tracking-sessions with the smallest 
HRS in January (0.42 km
2) and the largest HRS in May 
(1.01 km
2) (Fig. 3a). The cat’s HRS was over twice as large 
in May and September (2.4 times in May, 2.2 times in 
September) as it was in January. The DMR was 0.08 ± 
Fig. 2. The activity patterns of male Tsushima leopard cat in Sago in each tracking session. The gray area indicates nighttime. The 
outer vertical lines in the gray area indicate sunset and sunrise times in January and March, and the inner lines indicate 
sunset and sunrise times in May and September.


March 2010	
Home range and habitat use of the leopard cat      7
0.11 km
2 (mean ± SD, n = 7) in January, 0.07 ± 0.05 km
2 
(n = 7) in March, 0.06 ± 0.03 km
2 (n = 6) in May and 
0.13 ± 0.13 km
2 (n = 4) in September, and the DMD was 
1.60 ± 0.8 km (n = 7) in January, 1.49 ± 0.6 km (n = 7) in 
March, 1.67 ± 0.3 km (n = 6) in May and 1.27 ± 0.8 km (n 
= 4) in September. The mean DMR and DMD across all 
tracking-sessions were 0.08 ± 0.08 km
2 (n = 24) and 1.53 
± 0.61 km (n = 24), respectively. Figure 3b and 3c show 
seasonal variation in DMR and DMD. No significant 
differences were found among the tracking-sessions for 
DMR or DMD (Kruskal-Wallis test, d.f. = 3, P > 0.05), 
but the cat had the largest DMR and the shortest DMD 
in September, and the smallest DMR and longest DMD 
in May. The ratio of mean DMR to mean HRS in the 
tracking-sessions was 20.0%, 9.3%, 5.9% and 14.0%.
As baiting is expected to heavily influence the cat’s 
activity, we calculated the distance from the baiting sites 
to the cat’s location for each tracking session (Fig. 4). 
There were two baiting sites in the study area: one in 
the northern part and the other in the southern part. In 
January, we calculated the distance from the cat’s locations 
to the southern baiting site, because the cat used only the 
southern baiting site. On a daily basis, the cat only visited 
the southern baiting site and usually stayed for a few days 
near the baiting site. In January, 11% of the cat’s locations 
were included at the southern baiting site. Ten (66.6%) 
of the cat’s 15 visits to the baiting site were recorded 
in the nighttime (17:00-07:00). In March and May, we 
calculated the distance from the cat’s location to the 
northern baiting site because the cat only used or passed 
the northern baiting site during these months. In March, 
the cat was located in the area of the baiting site during 
the first four days of the telemetry survey (3.6% of cat’s 
locations were within the baiting site). After that it did 
not visit the baiting site during the radio-tracking period. 
In May, It just passed near to the baiting site at midnight, 
but the baiting site was never used. In September, neither 
baiting site was included in its home range. We calculated 
the distance from the cat to the northern baiting site in 
September because its home range at that time was closer 
to the northern baiting site, but the cat never used the 
baiting site.
Figure 5 shows the distribution of locations in each 
tracking-session and the habitat types visited. There 
is a river in the study area, with a bridge of 4 m width 
and 70 m length connecting the opposite sides of the 
river. Figures 6 and 7 show the habitat preferences of the 
collared leopard cat. Significant differences were found 
between the expected and observed habitat utilization 
by the cat during all of the tracking-sessions (χ2 - test, P 
< 0.001, Fig. 6). Figure 6 suggests that the cat used some 
habitat types selectively. The Ivlev’s electivity indices 
for daytime and nighttime habitat use are shown in 
Fig. 7. The cat avoided (i.e., had a negative preference 
for) agriculture areas (Ivlev’s Index: daytime < -0.72, 
nighttime < -0.51) and residential areas (daytime < -0.32, 
nighttime < -0.67) in all of tracking-sessions. On the 
other hand, the cat showed weak preference for artificial 
structures (daytime > 0.39, nighttime > 0.15) during the 
survey. It showed a strong preference for baiting sites 
in January (daytime 0.92, nighttime 0.91) and March 
Fig. 3. Seasonal variation in home range size (HRS), daily 
movement range (DMR) and daily movement distance 
(DMD). The numbers in the figure are sample sizes for 
each season. 


8      Dae-Hyun Oh et al.	
	
J. Ecol. Field Biol. 33 (1)
(daytime 0.91, nighttime 0.79), but avoided them in May 
(-0.1), and no baiting site was included in its home range 
in September. Among the natural habitats, the cat showed 
strong preference to deciduous forest in both daytime 
(0.64) and nighttime (0.74) in January, while it frequently 
used grassland in both daytime and nighttime (0.51, 0.46) 
in March, and in nighttime in May and September (> 
0.24). 
Discussion
A radio-collared male leopard cat had a generally 
nocturnal activity pattern, but it was occasionally active 
during the daytime. Our results were similar those 
from previous studies of leopard cats in other region 
(Thailand; Rabinowitz 1990, Grassman et al. 2005, 
Iriomote island in Japan; Schmidt et al. 2009), which 
reported that cat activity patterns were related with those 
of their prey. The main prey of the Tsushima leopard cat 
is small mammals (Inoue 1972, Tatara and Doi 1994), 
and two species of, murids (Apodemus speciosus and A. 
argenteus), their most important food items (Tatara and 
Doi 1994, Moteki unpublished), tend to be nocturnal 
(Nakata et al. 2009). Schmidt et al. (2009) reported that 
the activity of the Iriomote leopard cat seemed to be 
related with the period of peak activity of their main prey 
species: the evening peak of cat activity reflected peaks 
in vocal activity of several amphibians and the morning 
peak reflected a period of high activity of bird species. 
The activity patterns of the radio-collared cat in our 
study seemed to mirror those of the Tsushima leopard 
cat’s main prey, small mammals. There is, however, no 
literature describing the activity patterns of the main 
prey of the Tsushima leopard cat. Therefore it is difficult 
to conclusively explain the relationship between the 
observed activity peaks and the activity pattern of the 
leopard cat’s main prey. 
The mean home range size (HRS) of the leopard cat 
Fig. 4. Distance from the baiting sites to the cat for each tracking session in Sago. The dotted line indicates areas within a 25 m radius 
area from the baiting sites. The solid line connecting the dots (the cat’s locations) with each other was drawn only when the 
cat’s location was known for 3 continuous hours. Arrows show the time of day 00:00. 


March 2010	
Home range and habitat use of the leopard cat      9
monitored in this study was smaller than those reported 
from other leopard cats. Previous studies of a male 
leopard cat on Iriomote island, Okinawa, Japan, reported 
a HRS of 1.24 ± 0.41(Nakanishi et al. 2005) and 2.96 
± 1.80 km
2 (Izawa et al. 1991), and the HRS of a male 
Tsushima leopard cat living in a mountainous area was 
8.05 ± 2.10 km
2 (Mean ± SD, n = 9 tracking-sessions, 
Moteki unpublished). The cat monitored in this study 
(N2) had a significantly lower HRS than a male cat in a 
mountainous area (N1) (Mann-Whitney U-test, N1 = 9, 
N2 = 4, P < 0.05). However, Ueno (2004) reported that 
the mean HRS of males in rural (N3) areas was 2.43 ± 
2.97 km
2 (Mean ± SD, n = 16 tracking-sessions). There 
is no significant difference between the HRS of the cat 
in this study and those studied by Ueno (2004) (Mann-
Whitney U-test, N2 = 4, N3 = 16, P > 0.05), but the mean 
HRS of the leopard cat in this study was slightly smaller. 
In general, there is a negative relationship between 
home-range sizes of mammals and resource availability 
(Harestad and Bunnell 1979, Damuth 1981, Fridell and 
Litvaitis 1991, White et al. 2006). 
Riley (2006) reported that the mean home range sizes 
and core areas for bobcats in a rural zone were larger 
than those in a developed area and that small home 
ranges are likely related to high-quality habitat. Indeed, 
smaller home ranges must provide the requisite resources 
to sustain individual bobcats. At our study site, people 
have baited leopard cats at two sites in the study area 
since 1993. This artificial food enrichment food may lead 
to reduced HRS for cats in the local area. 
The daily movement distances (DMD) do not reflect 
the actual distance moved, because DMD may be 
somewhat underestimated in studies of radio-tracked 
animals (Jędrzejewski et al. 2002, Schmidt et al. 2009). 
Fig. 5. Home range and the cat’s locations in each tracking-session plotted on a vegetation map of Sago.


10      Dae-Hyun Oh et al.	
	
J. Ecol. Field Biol. 33 (1)
Fig. 6. Habitat Habitats preferred and avoided by a male Tsushima leopard cat in Sago (significant difference between expected 
and observed habitat use χ
2 - test, p < 0.001). Habitat types: 1 Agricultural areas, 2 Coniferous forest, 3 Deciduous forest, 4 
Evergreen forest, 5 Baiting sites, 6 Grasslands, 7 Residential areas, 8 Artificial structures. Grey bars = expected proportions, 
Black bars = observed proportions, “-” and “+” indicates a difference at the 0.05 level of significance from the Bonferroni 
confidence intervals. “-” is used when the proportion was less than expected. “+” is used when the proportion was more than 
expected. NS indicates no significant difference. The baiting site was not included in the home range in Sept. 2005.
Fig. 7. Habitats preferred and avoided during 
daytime and nighttime by a male Tsushima 
leopard cat in Sago, measured by Ivlev’s 
(1961) index. Habitat types: 1 Agricultural 
areas, 2 Coniferous forest, 3 Deciduous 
forest, 4 Evergreen forest, 5 Baiting points, 6 
Grasslands, 7 Residential areas, 8 Artificial 
structures. The baiting site was not included 
in the home range in Sept. 2005. 


March 2010	
Home range and habitat use of the leopard cat      11
However, it is possible to make general comparisons with 
other individuals of the same species. The mean DMD 
in this study was somewhat smaller than that of another 
leopard cat on Iriomote, which had a DMD of 3.24 ± 1.02 
km (n = 5, Schmidt et al. 2009) and also smaller than that 
of a Tsushima leopard cat in a mountainous area (3.24 
± 1.04 km, n = 9, Moteki unpublished). The studied cat 
travelled for a shorter time while hunting and appeared to 
take longer breaks for consuming prey, perhaps because 
of an abundance of prey resulting from artificial baiting 
prey as well as natural prey in the study site. Thus, the 
daily movement range was also smaller.
In general, the spatial organization of male carnivores, 
including felids, is influenced by two factors, food during 
the non-breeding season and fertile females during the 
breeding season. In the breeding season, males occupy 
larger areas than in the non-breeding season, probably 
to maximize their access to females (Sandell 1989, 
Sunquist and Sunquist 2002). The breeding season of 
the Tsushima leopard cat is from winter to early spring 
(Maekawa 1998, Ueno 2004, Moteki unpublished). 
Accordingly, male leopard cats in the Tsushima Islands 
show seasonal variation in their HRS, with larger home 
ranges in winter (Izawa et al. 2009). The other subspecies 
of leopard cat in Japan, the Iriomote cat, is also reported 
to display seasonal variation on HRS (Nakanishi 2005, 
Izawa et al. 2009). The leopard cat observed in this study, 
however, showed an unusual pattern of seasonal variation 
in HRS, and did not extend its home range in winter. 
This may be due to influence of two factors. In winter, 
possibly due to a decrease in natural food resources, 
the radio-collared cat showed extreme dependence 
on the baiting food resources. As a result, the activity 
of the cat was concentrated around the baiting area, 
resulting in a decrease in overall home range size. As 
the season changed, and natural food resources started 
to increase, the cat spent less time around the baiting 
area and widened its home range, and by summer, it 
had recovered its original home range size, providing 
evidence that leopard cat home range sizes on Tsushima 
are largely determined by their dependence on baiting 
food resource. In addition, the smaller winter home range 
of the cat that we observed may have been the result 
of the breeding activity of older neighboring male cats. 
Increasing the size of the home range in the breeding 
season may crucial to the breeding success of adult males, 
and high levels of competition and conflict may occur 
during this process. The cat that we tracked was a young 
adult during this study, according to age estimates from 
tooth cementum annuli (Nakanishi et al. unpublished) 
determined after the cat’s death. Considering the rarity 
of home range overlap for neighbors of the same sex 
(Sunquist and Sunquist 2002), it is possible that the cat 
in our study may have been driven out of parts of its 
original home range by neighboring adult male cats. This 
may have caused a reduction in the home range size of 
the cat in the winter relative to its home range size in 
spring and summer.
The Tsushima leopard cat generally prefers natural 
habitats dominated by deciduous or coniferous forest, 
as well as grasslands and agricultural areas in their 
ranges (Izawa et al. 1991, Tajiri et al. 1996, Watanabe 
et al. 2003a). The cat that we studied showed a strong 
preference for artificial structures and baiting sites, but 
avoided residential areas. Shrines and graveyards might 
have provided good resting spaces for this cat. Small 
habitat remnants on private land and in green-space 
areas (i.e. parks, gardens and golf courses) can potentially 
provide refuge for wildlife threatened by urbanization 
(Hodgkison 2007). The cat that we studied may have 
used human-made structures as places of refuge from 
bad weather during the surveying periods. In January, 
the cat approached the baiting site every day, suggesting 
that its ranging behavior was strong influenced by 
artificial baiting when the density of its main prey, small 
mammals, was low in winter (Moteki unpublished). As 
the density of small mammals increased in the March, 
the HRS of the cat got larger and the frequency of baiting 
site use decreased. The cat never used the baiting sites 
in May and September. In short, while the density of 
its main prey was low, the cat tended to rely heavily 
on artificial prey and to have small HRS. As density of 
small mammals increased, it preferred natural prey and 
its HRS expanded. Baiting sites are clearly attractive to 
leopard cats in the study site. We observed other cats in 
the northern baiting site during the survey periods, and 
the northern baiting site was used by a female leopard 
cat during the nursing season in May and June of 2001 
(Doi et al. 2005). Home range of female felids should be 
determined by the availability of food for their kittens 
and themselves (Sunquist and Sunquist 2002). Therefore, 
the ebaiting site may have been an important resource for 
female leopard cats and their kittens as this site. 
The radio-collared leopard cat seldom approached the 
residential and agricultural areas in day or night during 
the study periods. Leopard cats are sensitive to human 
presence or disturbance, but they do occasionally come 
into villages. The cat that we observed in this study was 
captured by a human when it attacked domestic fowl 
in a village coop, so this cat may have learned to avoid 


12      Dae-Hyun Oh et al.	
	
J. Ecol. Field Biol. 33 (1)
humans and their activities. Riley et al. (2003) reported 
that large carnivores can come into conflict with humans 
and their domestic animals, and more-specialized species 
may not benefit from human-associated foods such as 
ornamental fruit or garbage. The scats of another native 
felid in Japan, the Iriomote leopard cat, did not contain 
artifacts from garbage (Watanabe et al. 1993b), suggesting 
that it did not take advantage of human garbage as a 
food source. Interspecific competition with domestic 
cats may also cause leopard cats to avoid villages, but we 
have no data about domestic cats that would allow us to 
evaluate their influence on leopard cats in the study area. 
Although leopard cats in some areas prefer agricultural 
areas (Izawa et al 1991, Watanabe et al. 2003a), the cat 
that we observed in this study avoided agricultural areas, 
perhaps because it would have had to cross the village 
and road to gain access to agricultural land. 
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the staff of the Tsushima Wildlife 
Conservation Center. We thank Dr. M. Akuzawa of 
Kagoshima University for his assistance and Dr. A. 
Nakamoto of the University of the Ryukyus for their 
valuable comments and advice. We also thank the 
students of the Ecological Laboratory of the Faculty of 
Science, University of the Ryukyus, and the people of the 
Tsushima islands for their kindness and help during the 
survey. This study was partly supported by the twenty-
first century COE program of the University of the 
Ryukyus. 
Literature Cited
Benson JF, Chamberlain MJ, Leopold BD. 2006. Regulation of 
space use in a solitary felid: population density or prey 
availability? Anim Behav 71: 683-693.
Byers CR, Steinhorst RK, Krausman PR. 1984. Clarification of 
a technique for analysis of utilization-availability data. J 
Wildlife Manage 48(3): 1050-1053.
Clarke GP, White PCL, Harris S. 1998. Effect of roads on 
badger Meles meles populations in south-west England. 
Biol Conserv 86: 117-124.
Damuth J. 1981. Home range, home range overlap, and species 
energy use among herbivorous mammals. Biol J Linn Soc 
15: 185-193.
Delany MJ. 1982. Mammal Ecology. Blackie, Glasgow and 
London.
Doi T, Kumamoto M, Izawa M, Ueno A. 2005. Home range 
use pattern and ‘nest’ environments of a nursing female 
of Tsushima leopard cat (Felis bengalensis euptilura). 
Trans. Nagasaki Biol Soc 60: 1-12 (in Japanese with 
English abstract).
Fridell RA, Litvaitis JA. 1991. Influence of resource 
distribution and abundance in home-range characteristics 
of southern flying squirrels. Can J Zool 69: 2589-2593.
Grassman LI Jr, Tewes ME, Silvy NJ, Kreetiyutanont K. 
2005. Spatila organization and diet of the leopard cat 
(Prionailurus bengalensis) in north-central Thailnad. J 
Zool 266: 45-54.
Harestad AS, Bunnell FL. 1979. Home range and body weight 
- a reevaluation. Ecology 60: 389-402.
Hodgkison S, Hero J-M, Warnken J. 2007. The efficacy of 
small-scale conservation efforts, as assessed on Australian 
golf courses. Biol conserv 136:576-586.
Inoue T. 1972. The food habit of Tsushima leopard cat, Felis 
bengalensis ssp., analyzed from their scats. J Mammal Soc 
Japan 5(5): 155-169 (in Japanese).
Ivlev VS, 1961, experimental ecology of the baiting of fishes. 
Yale University Press, New Haven CT.
Izawa M, Doi T, Nakanishi N, Teranishi A. 2009. Ecology 
and conservation of two endangered subspecies of the 
leopard cat (Prionailurus bengalensis) on Japanese islands. 
Biol conserv 142: 1884-1890.
Izawa M, Doi T, Ono Y. 1991. Ecological study on the two 
species of Felidae in Japan. In Wildlife conservation. 
Present trends and perspectives for the 21st century. 
(Maruyama N et al., eds). Yokohama, Japan, pp 141-144.
Izawa M, Nakanishi N. 2009. Carnivora FELIDAE 
Prionailurus bengalensis euptilurus, In The wild mammals 
of Japan (Ohdach SD, Ishibashi Y, Iwasa MA, Saitoh T, 
eds). Shoukadoh, Kyoto, p. 226.
Japan Wildlife Research Center. 2005. Research report on 
environmental habitat of the Tsushima leopard cat (2004). 
Japan Wildlife Research Center, Tokyo (in Japanese).
Jędrzejewski W, Schmidt K, Okarma H, Kowalczyk R. 2002. 
Movement pattern and home range use by the Eurasian 
lynx in Białowież Primeval forest (Poland). Ann Zool 
Fenn 39:29-41.
Kiyota M, Okamura H, Yonezaki S, Hiramatsu K. 2004. A 
review of statistical analyses on resource selection - 
1. Basic concepts and calculations. Honyurui Kagaku 
(Mammalian Science) 44(2): 129-146 (in Japanese).
Kiyota M, Okamura H, Yonezaki S, Hiramatsu K. 2005. A 
review of statistical analyses on resource selection - 2. 
Introduction to several analysis techniques. Honyurui 
Kagaku (Mammalian Science) 45(1): 1-24 (in Japanese).
Mader HJ. 1984. Animal Habitat Isolation by Roads and 
Agricultural Fields. Biol conserv 29: 81-96.
Maekawa K. 1998. Home range utilization pattern and spacing 
pattern of the Tsushima leopard cat, Felis bengalensis 
euptilura (Carnivora; Felidae). M.S. Thesis, University of 
the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan (in Japanese with English 
abstract).
Mohr CO. 1947. Table of equivalent populations of North 
American small mammals. Amn Midl Nat 37: 223-249.


March 2010	
Home range and habitat use of the leopard cat      13
Nakanishi N, Okamura M, Watanabe S, Izawa M, Doi T. 2005. 
The effect of habitat on home range size in the Iriomote 
Cat Prionailurus bengalensis iriomotensis. Mammal 
Study 30: 1-10.
Nakata K, Saitoh T, Iwasa MA. 2009. Rodentia Muridae 
Apodemus speciosus and A. argenteus, In The wild 
mammals of Japan (Ohdach SD, Ishibashi Y, Iwasa MA, 
Saitoh T, eds). Shoukadoh, Kyoto, pp. 169-173.
Neu CW, Byers CR, Peek JM. 1974. A technique for analysis of 
utilization-availability data. J Wildlife Manag 38(3): 541-
545.
Nowell K, Jackson P. 1996. Wild cats: status survey and 
conservation action plan. IUCN/SSC Cat specialist 
Group, pp 85-87.
Prange S, Gehrt SD, Wiggers EP. 2004. Influences of 
Anthropogenic Resources on Raccoon (Procyon Lotor) 
Movements and Spatial Distribution. J Mammal 85(3): 
483-490.
Rabinowitz A. 1990. Notes on the behavior and movements of 
Leopard cats, Felis bengalensis, in a Dry Tropical Forest 
Mosaic in Thailand. Biotropica 22(4): 397-403.
Riley SPD. 2006. Spatial Ecology of Bobcats and Gray Foxes 
in Urban and Rural Zones of a National Park. J Wildlife 
Manage 70(5):1425-1435.
Riley SPD, Sauvajot RM, Fuller TK, York EC, Kamradt DA, 
Bromley C, Wayne RK. 2003. Effects of urbanization 
and habitat fragmentation on bobcats and coyotes in 
Southern California. Conserv Biol 17(2): 566-576.
Sandell M. 1989. The mating tactics and spacing patterns of 
solitary carnivores. In Carnivore behavior, ecology, and 
evolution (Gettleman JL, ed). Cornell University Press, 
pp. 164-182.
Schmidt K, Nakanishi N, Izawa M, Okamura M, Watanabe 
S, Tanaka S, Doi T. 2009. The reproductive tactics and 
activity patterns of solitary carnivores: the Iriomote cat. J 
Ethol 27: 165-174.
Steinheim G, Wegge P, Fjellstad JI, Jnawali SR, Weladji RB. 
2005. Dry season diets and habitat use of sympatric Asian 
elephants (Elephas maximus) and greater one-horned 
rhinoceros (Rhinocerus nuicornis) in Nepal. J Zool 265: 
377-385.
Sunquist F, Sunquist M. 2002. Wildcats of the world. The 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA.
Tajiri H, Doi T, Izawa M, Tatara M. 1996. Home range size 
and habitat selection of the Tsushima leopard cat (Felis 
bengalensis euptilura) in the Tsushima Islands, Japan. 
Island Study in Okinawa 14:31-38 (in Japanese with 
English abstrcat).
Tatara M, Doi T. 1994. Comparative analyses on food habits of 
Japanese marten, Siberian weasel and leopard cat in the 
Tsushima islands, Japan. Ecol Res 9: 99-107.
Tsushima population database. 2005. Tsushima City 
Hall. http://www.city.tsushima.nagasaki.jp/system/
system07_01.html. Accessed 7 September 2009 (in 
Japanese).
Ueno A. 2004. The occupancy and replacement of the home 
range of resident Tsushima leopard cat Prionailurus 
bengalensis euptilura in a suitable habitat. M.S. Thesis, 
University of the Ryukyus, 11 pp. (in Japanese with 
English abstract).
Vitousek PM, Mooney HA, Lubchenco J, Melillo JM. 1997. 
Human Domination of Earth’s Ecosystems. Science 277: 
494-499.
Watanabe S, Ueno A, Hiyama T, Ohashi S, Oshiro M, Doi T, 
Izawa M. 2003a. Evaluation of Habitat Suitability of the 
Tsushima Leopard Cat Prionailurus bengalensis euptilura 
using Geographic Information and Tracking Data (in 
Japanese). GISA; Abstracts/Summary Collection - GISA 
Conference Papers and Proceedings Collection 12: 311-
314 (in Japanese with English abstract).
Watanabe S, Nakanish N, Izawa M. 2003b. Habitat and prey 
resource overlap between the Iriomote cat Prionailurus 
iriomotensis and introduced feral cat Felis catus based on 
assessment of scat content and distribution. Mammal 
Study 28: 47-56. 
Weather statistical information. 2005. Japan Meteorological 
Agency. http://www.data.jma.go.jp/obd/stats/etrn/index.
php. Accessed 7 September 2009 (in Japanese).
White GC, Garrot RA. 1990a. Analysis of wildlife radio-
tracking data. Academic Press, San Diego, pp 145-182.
White GC, Garrot RA. 1990b. Analysis of wildlife radio-
tracking data. Academic Press, San Diego, pp 183-205.
White GJ, Gubiani R, Smallman N, Snell K, Morton A. 2006. 
Home range, habitat selection and diet of foxes (Vulpes 
vulpes) in a semi-urban riparian environment. Wildlife 
Res 33: 175-180.
Yamaguchi T, Urata A. 1970. Note on the distribution of the 
Tsushima leopard cat on Tsushima Island. Bull. Nagasaki 
University 11: 25-39 (in Japanese with English abstract). 
(Received January 6, 2009; Accepted February 18, 2010)
