--- 
source: 2012 paul.pdf
--- 

IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 15 - 
 
R E P O R T 
 
 
HOW TO CALCULATE RANGE AND POPULATION SIZE 
FOR THE OTTER? 
THE IRISH APPROACH AS A CASE STUDY 
 
Ferdia MARNELL1, Lughaidh Ó NÉILL2, Deirdre LYNN
 
1 
1National Parks and Wildlife Service, Department of Arts, Heritage and the Gaeltacht, 7 Ely Place, Dublin 
2, Ireland, Ferdia Marnell - e-mail: Ferdia.Marnell@ahg.gov.ie 
2
 
Department of Zoology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland 
 
 
(Received 2nd November 2011, accepted 8th
 
 January 2012) 
ABSTRACT: All EU Member States are obliged to submit reports to the EU 
Commission every 6 years, detailing the conservation status of species and habitats listed 
on the Habitats Directive. The otter (Lutra lutra) is one such species. Despite a number of 
national surveys that showed that the otter was widespread across the country, in Ireland’s 
2007 conservation status assessment the otter was considered to be in unfavourable 
condition. While the Range, Habitat and Future Prospects categories were all considered 
favourable, Population was deemed to be unfavourable. 
This paper examines the data behind the 2007 assessment by Ireland, which included 
three national otter surveys and a series of radio-tracking studies. Range was mapped and 
calculated based on the results of national distribution surveys together with records 
submitted from the public. Population size was estimated by calculating the extent of 
available habitats (rivers, lakes and coasts), dividing that by the typical home range size 
and then multiplying the result by the proportion of positive sites in the most recent 
national survey. 
While the Range of the otter in Ireland did not decrease between the 1980/81 and the 
2004/05 surveys, Population trend was calculated as -23.7%.  As a consequence, the most 
recent national Red Data List for Ireland lists the species as Near Threatened (Marnell et 
al., 2009). 
 
Keywords: Population estimates; conservation status; Habitats Directive reporting; 
national survey; Lutra lutra 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) occurs throughout Ireland along rivers, lakes 
and coasts and, compared to most other countries in Europe, Ireland continues to 
support a large and healthy otter population (Chapman and Chapman, 1981; Lunnon 
and Reynolds, 1991; Bailey and Rochford, 2006). 
Three national distribution surveys of otters have been conducted in Ireland, based 
on the standard field methodology whereby up to 600m of river bank / coastline are 


IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 16 - 
surveyed for signs. (e.g. Lenton et al., 1980). The first survey, based on a random 
stratified sample of 2,042 sites, found signs of otters throughout the country, at 88% of 
sites surveyed (Chapman and Chapman, 1982). A smaller follow-up survey of 246 of the 
original sites was carried out a decade later (Lunnon and Reynolds, 1991). Initial results 
suggested that otters had not declined. However, when a further survey was completed in 
2004/05 (Bailey and Rochford, 2006) a significant decline of almost 24% had occurred. 
Detailed examination of original survey cards from the 1991 survey showed that this 
decline had largely happened in the 1980s but had been overlooked due to over-
surveying (i.e. repeat surveys at negative sites, extended surveys beyond 600m -
In Ireland’s 2007 conservation status assessment (under Article 17 of the EU 
Habitats Directive), the otter was considered to be in unfavourable (inadequate) 
condition (NPWS, 2007). This assessment incorporates elements on Range, Habitat, 
Future Prospects and Population, and while the first three categories were all considered 
to be in favourable condition, Population was judged to be “unfavourable (inadequate)”. 
 see 
Bailey and Rochford, 2006 for details).  
The EU Commission have produced guidelines for the assessment of data for the 
Article 17 reports (Evans and Arvela, 2011), however there is still considerable variation 
between countries in how the data is manipulated and how the assessments are 
completed. This makes inter-country comparisons and Europe-wide summaries difficult. 
This paper presents the background to Ireland’s 2007 assessment of otter Range and 
Population in an effort to facilitate discussion between country agencies in advance of 
the next Article 17 reports due in 2013. 
 
 
METHODS 
 
Range 
The EU Commission definition of range is “the spatial limits in which a species 
is found” and this is calculated by drawing an envelope around the known distribution 
points for the species: “Technically the range will be calculated by filling in 
unoccupied grids between cells of distribution” (Evans and Arvela, 2011). 
The recommended approach for Article 17 reporting is to prepare and report on 
these data at the 10km level. For wide ranging species such as the otter, the EU 
guidelines recommend closing gaps between known distribution points of 40 – 90 km 
depending on the species. “A gap distance should be understood as the distance 
between two distribution grids, that will not be joined together to form a single 
polygon, component of range…… The gap distance should reflect the ecological 
characteristic of the habitat types and species. This means that for mobile species the 
range will be calculated using larger gaps and conversely smaller gaps will be used 
for more sedentary species. The Guidelines go on to recommend a gap distance of 40-
90 km for terrestrial mammals, depending on dispersal ability........ …. but other gap 
distances can be used if based on detailed knowledge of the species within the 
Member State” (Evans and Arvela, 2011). 
As Ireland is a relatively small country and we have good distribution data for otter 
we used a more conservative cut-off of 20 km for gap closure.  In other words, gaps 
between known distribution points of up to 20 km are included in the range, but gaps of 
> 20km would lead to a hole appearing within, or at the edge of, the range map. 
Otter records on the NPWS database from 2000-2007 were used to produce the 
range map. The majority of these distribution records come from the survey of 2004/05 
(Bailey and Rochford, 2006); additional records come from the authors’ own field work, 
other NPWS staff and the public (Figure 1). 


IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 17 - 
 
Figure 1. Map of Ireland showing otter range and distribution  
 
Population 
The estimation of population size was based on a simple formula wherein the 
extent of available habitat was divided by typical female home range size. Females 
were used because they are known to maintain more stable home ranges than males 
(Kruuk, 1995, 2006). This figure - in effect the potential total number of female home 
ranges - was then multiplied by the proportion of positive sites in the most recent 
national survey. 


IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 18 - 
2
 
sites)
 e
  
%
1
(
size
 
 territory
female
 
average
habitat
 
of
Extent 
 
population
adult 
 
Total
×
+
×
=
v
 
 
Extent of habitat was estimated on the basis of four classes of water bodies: 
rivers, streams, lakes and coast (OSi, 2005). Ó Néill (2008) has used the ground-truth 
data gathered by Chapman & Chapman (1982) and Bailey and Rochford (2006) to 
calculate the average width of river features (12.9 m; n = 893), and the average width 
of stream features (4.2 m; n = 955). In addition, a 10 m riparian buffer (both banks) 
was considered to comprise part of the otter habitat along watercourses. The width of 
lake and coast habitat was estimated to be an 80 m strip of water (reflecting the fact 
that otters seldom forage beyond this distance - Kruuk et al., 1998) plus a 10 m 
terrestrial buffer. 
Ó Néill (2008) has also calculated the total habitat lengths for each category 
based on simple manipulations of the available Ordnance Survey data in Ireland (OSi, 
2005) (Table 1). 
 
Table 1: The total length and area of otter habitat present in the Republic of Ireland 
  
           Total 
          rivers 
    Total       
Streams 
Total Coast 
 
Total Lake 
 
Width of water body (m) 
12.9 
      4.2 
80.0 
80.0 
Width of habitat (m) 
32.9 
     24.2 
90.0 
90.0 
Length of habitat (km) 
13326.1 
64458.1 
8107.6 
4298.9 
Habitat areas (km2
439.0 
) 
1560 
729.7 
386.9 
Total habitat size (km2
3115.4 
) 
  
  
  
 
Average females’ home ranges were derived from a combination of the following: 
• Radio-tracking data for seven adult females in mesotrophic Irish rivers (>0.04 
mg/l orthophosphate). These data showed that females occupied exclusive 
home-ranges averaging 7.5 ± 1.5 km that were inversely related to river width 
(Ó Néill et al., 2009). 
• Observations of ten female otters on oligotrophic rivers (<0.02mg/l 
orthophosphate) in Scotland showed no relationship between home-ranges and 
river width, with home-ranges averaging 18.7 ± 3.5km (Kruuk, 2006). 
• Observations of 10 coastal otters on Shetland found that adult females 
occupied group ranges at densities of 2.6 ± 0.9 km/individual (Kruuk and 
Moorhouse, 1991). 
 
To account for the lack of data for watercourses with orthophosphate levels 
between 0.02 and 0.04mg/l, we followed Ó Néill’s (2008) approach and took the 
fitted line as the average intercept and slopes for more and less productive rivers. Note 
that the otters living in the oligotrophic rivers showed no relationship with river width 
so they had a slope of 0 and an intercept of 18.6. For mesotrophic and oligotrophic 
rivers confidence intervals for linear regression were calculated for home range 
lengths of Scottish and Irish otters with river width. For these categories the upper and 
lower values for home range length were used to calculate the lower and upper values 
for otter numbers. For intermediate rivers we assumed the best estimate of otter home 
range length as the average of the mesotrophic and oligotrophic values. The upper 
confidence interval for population for these intermediate waters was based on the 
lower confidence for mesotrophic home range length and the lower confidence 


IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 19 - 
interval for population for these intermediate waters was based on the upper 
confidence for oligotrophic home range length. For coastal otters, confidence intervals 
were calculated based on published averages and standard deviations or where these 
were unavailable, derived from the published raw data (op. cit.). 
Based on interpolation of the point data for known orthophosphate levels 
(McGarrigle et al., 2010), each section of river within the contours of a particular 
orthophosphate level was assigned that orthophosphate value. The length of each 
water course type (oligotrophic river, meso-oligotrophic river, mesotrophic river, 
oligotrophic stream etc.) within each river basin district was converted into a number 
of otters by dividing it by the spatial requirements of female otters in that habitat. 
The total number of potential female territories was then multiplied by the 
proportion of positive records in the most recent national survey (i.e. as proxy for the 
number of occupied territories) to give an estimate of female otter population. The 
same calculations were also made for previous national surveys thereby allowing an 
estimate of population trend over time to be derived. 
 
 
RESULTS 
 
Range 
The otter’s range was based on distribution records from 358 individual 10 km 
squares. No major discontinuities within the range were identified, but gaps around the 
periphery are apparent (Figure 1). The total range was calculated as 665 10 km squares, 
i.e. 66,500 km². This is equivalent to 75 % of the land mass of Ireland. 
Despite the decline in occurrence from 88 % of sites surveyed in 1980/81 to 70% 
in 2005, the otter remains widespread throughout the country with no apparent reduction 
in range when compared to the results of previous national survey. Although the current 
range is considered to be favourable, this is still thought to be an underestimate of the 
actual range as coastal sites have been overlooked to some extent in national surveys to 
date (Figure 1). 
 
Population 
The otter population in Ireland is estimated to be in the region of 6,416 female 
animals (not including juveniles), with an upper confidence level of 9,724 and a lower 
confidence level of 4,537. Using the same formula on the data from previous surveys 
suggests that otter numbers have fallen since the early 1980s by approximately 2,000 
females, or, assuming a 1:1 male to female ratio (Kruuk, 1995), a total of 4,000 adults, 
(Table 2). 
 
Table 2: National population estimates (and lower and upper confidence levels) of adult females based 
on the status recorded in the three national surveys to date. 
 
1980/81 
1990/91 
2004/05 
estimate 
LCL 
UCL 
estimate 
LCL 
UCL 
Estimate 
LCL 
UCL 
National 
8405.8 
6810.5 
11304.0 
6960.2 
4653.1 
10981.8 
6416.1 
4536.5 
9724.3 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
The otter has suffered some declines in Ireland over the past 30 years. However, 
compared to most other European countries, the species remains widespread and there 
is still a healthy population across the country. This current range covers 75 % of the 


IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 20 - 
total area of Ireland (c. 875 10 km squares). A less conservative gap closure of 40 km 
would have added a further 39 10 km squares around the periphery of the range - an 
increase of 6 %. 
For the purposes of calculating trends, the EU guidelines argue that “A range 
calculated with larger gap distances (40–50 km) is more sensitive to changes at the 
margins of the distribution and large scale changes within the outer limit of the 
distribution. On the other hand range calculated with smaller gap distances (20 km) is 
sensitive to small scale changes (Evans and Arvela, 2011). 
We anticipate that better data will be responsible for the apparent changes in 
range in the next conservation assessment. Much of the Irish coast, particularly in the 
south and along the western seaboard, contains habitat suitable for the otter (Marnell 
pers ob.). However, previous national surveys have under-represented this element of 
its distribution and consequently the range map shows the species to be absent from 
much of the Irish coastline. A 4th
While the otter’s range may actually increase, there is no reason to believe that 
the population estimate will increase. There was some flexibility in how population 
estimates could be presented in the 2007 assessment (e.g. countries could use the 
number of occupied 10 km squares instead of actual numbers). However, for the 2013 
report, the EU Commission requires population estimates to be provided as “number 
of adults”. There are many difficulties with providing accurate population figures and 
several different approaches have been used with varying degrees of success over the 
years. These have included estimations based on, for example, the number of 
occupied holts (e.g. Kruuk et al., 1989), snow tracks (e.g. Sidorovich and Lauzhel, 
1992; Sulkava, 2007), infra-red cameras (Garcia et al., 2006) and extrapolations from 
genetic fingerprinting (Prigioni et al., 2006). The method we have used requires 
detailed information on habitat availability to underpin the calculations. An 
understanding of home range size is also necessary. For the 2007 report, Ireland used 
home range size data for coastal otters reported from Scotland (Kruuk and 
Moorhouse, 1991). In 2010, GSM tracking studies of coastal otters were carried out in 
Ireland and the data from this work (Quaglietta et al., 2012) will improve our 
calculations of otter population in Ireland for the next conservation assessment in 
2013. Further work on home range sizes in oligotrophic rivers and lakes in Ireland 
would also be useful. Calculations can also be further refined by using more detailed 
information on trophic status (and therefore carrying capacity) of freshwaters and 
coastal waters. Developing population trends for individual river basins also allows 
more detailed investigation of localized declines/increases which may be masked by 
the national picture (Ó Néill, 2008). 
 national survey is underway in Ireland and coastal 
sites are being specifically targeted to provide a more comprehensive understanding 
of otter distribution here. The next Article 17 report will include this data and 
consequently the figure for the otter’s range is likely to increase - not of course 
indicating any increase in the otter’s range, but reflecting a better understanding of its 
actual distribution.  
Home range size extrapolations could also be improved if comprehensive fish 
biomass data was available nationally. Fish biomass assessments in Ireland have 
traditionally focused on salmonid populations. However, in more recent years, a more 
comprehensive sampling programme has been initiated to comply with requirements 
under the Water Framework Directive (IFI, 2011). It is hoped that in time this data 
can be integrated into the conservation assessment for the otter. Despite these 
shortcomings the method we have used provides a fairly reliable estimate of 
population size (with confidence intervals) and providing national distribution surveys 


IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 21 - 
are conducted at regular intervals and using comparable methods, the calculation of 
trend is robust (Reid et al., in prep). 
 
REFERENCES 
Bailey, M., Rochford, J. (2006). Otter Survey of Ireland 2004/2005. Irish Wildlife Manuals No. 23. 
National Parks and Wildlife Service, Department of Environment, Heritage and Local 
Government, Dublin, Ireland. 
Chapman, P. J., Chapman, L.L. (1982). Otter survey of Ireland. Vincent Wildlife Trust. 
Conroy, J.W.H., Chanin P. (2001). The distribution and status of the European otter (Lutra lutra) - A 
review. In: Conroy J.W.H., Gutleb, A., Yoxon, P. (eds.), Proc. Otter Toxicol. Conference, 
Skye 2000, International Otter Survival Fund, Broadford, Skye, pp. 7-28. 
Council of Europe (1979). Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural 
Habitats. CETS 104. Bern, Switzerland. 
Evans. D., Arvela, M. (2011). Assessment and reporting under the Habitats Directive. European Topic 
Centre on Biological Diversity. Paris, France. 
Garcia de Leaniz, C., Forman, D.W., Davies, S., Thomson, A. (2006). Non-intrusive monitoring of 
otters (Lutra lutra) using infrared technology. Journal of Zoology 270: 577-584. 
IFI (2011). Sampling fish for the Water Framework Directive. Summary Report 2010. Inland Fisheries 
Ireland, Dublin. 
Jongh, A. de, Ó Néill, L., Marnell, F., de Jong, T. (in prep). GPS/GSM tracking of coastal otters in 
Roaringwater Bay, West Cork, Ireland. 
Kruuk, H. (1995). Wild Otters - predation and populations. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Kruuk, H. (2006). Otters – ecology, behaviour and conservation. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Kruuk, H., Carss, D.N., Conroy, J.W.H., Gaywood, M. J. (1998). Habitat use and conservation of 
otters (Lutra lutra) in Britain. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London 71, 119-133. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Kruuk, H., Moorhouse, A. (1991). The spatial organization of otters (Lutra lutra) in Shetland.  
Journal of Zoology, London 224: 41-57. 
Kruuk, H., Moorhouse, A., Conroy, J.W.H., Durbin, L., Frears, S. (1989). An estimate of numbers 
and habitat preferences of otters Lutra lutra in Shetland, UK. Biological Conservation 49: 241-
254. 
Lenton, E.J., Chanin, P.R.F., Jeffries, D.J. (1980). Otter survey of England 1977-79. Nature 
Conservancy Council, London. 
Lunnon, R.M., Reynolds, J.D. (1991). Distribution of the otter (Lutra lutra) in Ireland and its value as 
an indicator of habitat quality. In: Jeffrey D.W., Madden, B. (eds.). Bio-indicators and 
environmental management, 435-443. London, Academic Press. 
MacFadden, Y.M.T., Fairley, J.S. (1984). Food of otters in an Irish limestone river system with 
special reference to the crayfish. Journal of Life Sciences - Royal Dublin Society 5: 65-76. 
Marnell, F. Kingston, N., Looney, D. (2009). Ireland Red List No. 3 - Terrestrial mammals. National 
Parks & Wildlife Service, Dublin, Ireland. 
McGarrigle, M., Lucey, J., O’Cinneide, M. (2010). Water Quality in Ireland 2007-2009. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Wexford, Ireland. 
NPWS (2007). The status of EU protected habitats and species in Ireland. National Parks & Wildlife 
Service, Dublin, Ireland. 
Ó Néill, L. (2008). Population dynamics of the Eurasian otter in Ireland: integrating density and 
demography into conservation planning. Unpublished PhD Thesis. Trinity College Dublin, 
Ireland. 
Ó Néill, L., Veldhuizen, T., de Jongh, A., Rochford, J. (2009). Ranging behaviour and socio-biology 
of Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) on lowland mesotrophic river systems. European Journal of 
Wildlife Research: 55: 363-370. 
OSi (2005). OSi Discovery series vector data. Ordnance Survey Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. 
Ottino, P., Giller, P. (2004). Distribution, density, diet and habitat use of the otter in relation to land 
use in the Araglin valley, Southern Ireland. Biology and Environment, 104B: 1-17. 
Prigioni,C., Balestrieri, A., Remonti, L., Sgrosso, S., Priore, G. (2006). How many otters are there 
in Italy? Hystrix 17: 29-36. 
Quaglietta, L., Martins, B.H., de Jongh, A., Mira, A., Boitani, L., (2012). A low-cost GPS 
GSM/GPRS telemetry system: performance in stationary field tests and preliminary data on wild 
otters (Lutra lutra). PLoS ONE 7: e29235. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0029235  
Reid, N., Hayden, B., Marnell, F., McDonald, R. (in prep). National Otter survey of Ireland 
2010/2011. Irish Wildlife Manuals. 


IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 28(B) 2011 
 
 
- 22 - 
Sidorovich, V.E., Lauzhel, G.O. (1992). Numbers of otters and approach to population estimation in 
Byelorussia. IUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 7: 13-16 
Sulkava, R. (2007). Snow tracking: a relevant method for estimating otter Lutra lutra populations. 
Wildl. Biol. 13: 208-218. 
 
RÉSUMÉ 
COMMENT EVALUER LA DISTRIBUTION ET LA TAILLE DE LA 
POPULATION DE LOUTRES? CAS D’UNE ETUDE IRLANDAISE 
Les États membres de l'UE sont tenus de soumettre des rapports à la Commission 
européenne tous les 6 ans, détaillant l'état de conservation des espèces et des habitats 
figurant sur la Directive Habitats. La loutre (Lutra lutra) est l’une de ces espèces. 
Malgré un certain nombre d'enquêtes nationales qui ont montré que la Loutre était très 
répandue à travers l’Irlande, son statut de conservation en 2007 était considéré comme 
dans un état défavorable. Alors que la distribution, l'habitat et les possibilités 
d’expansion étaient considérés comme favorables, la population a été jugée comme 
menacée. Ce document examine les données recueillies depuis l'évaluation de son 
statut en 2007 comprenant trois enquêtes nationales ainsi qu’une série d'études de 
radio-pistage. La distribution a été cartographiée et les calculs basés sur les résultats 
des enquêtes nationales associée aux données reçues du public. La taille de la 
population a été estimée en calculant l'étendue des habitats disponibles (rivières, lacs 
et côtes), divisé par la taille du domaine vital moyen et multiplié par le pourcentage de 
sites positifs de l'enquête nationale la plus récente. Alors que la répartition de la 
Loutre n'a pas diminué en Irlande entre les enquêtes de 1980/1981 et 2004/2005, la 
population aurait chuté de 23,7%. En conséquence, la liste rouge nationale a classé la 
Loutre comme espèce quasi menacée (Marnell et al., 
 
2009). 
 
RESUMEN 
COMO CALCULAR EL RANGO Y TAMAÑO POBLACIONAL DE LA 
NUTRIA? EL ENFOQUE IRLANDÉS COMO ESTUDIO DE CASO 
Todos los miembros de la UE están obligados a presentar reportes a la Comisión 
Europea cada 6 años, detallando el estado de conservación de especies y hábitats 
listados en la “Directiva Hábitats”. La nutria (Lutra lutra) es una de las especies 
incluidas en esta lista. A pesar de una serie de censos que mostraron que la nutria se 
distribuye ampliamente por el país, en Irlanda en el año 2007 la evaluación del estado 
de conservación diagnosticó que la nutria se encuentra en una situación desfavorable. 
Mientras que las categorías de Rango, Hábitat y Perspectivas hacia el futuro, fueron 
consideradas favorables, la categoría Población fue considerada desfavorable. El 
presente trabajo analiza los datos detrás de la evaluación del 2007 en Irlanda, que 
constó de tres censos nacionales de nutrias y una serie de estudios de telemetría. Se 
mapeó y calculó el rango basándose en la información combinada de los resultados de 
censos de ámbitos nacionales con registros enviados por el público. El tamaño de la 
población fue estimado calculando la extensión de hábitats disponibles (ríos, lagos y 
costas) y dividiéndolo entre el rango de acción diario típico. Este resultado fue 
multiplicado por la proporción de lugares con avistamientos confirmados del censo 
nacional más actual. Mientras que el rango de acción de la nutria en Irlanda no 
disminuyó entre los censos de 1980/81 y los de 2005/05, la tendencia poblacional fue 
calculada en -23,7%. Como consecuencia, la especie figura  como “Casi amenazada 
(NT)” en la Lista Roja Nacional de Irlanda (Marnell et al., 2009). 
