--- 
source: 2572B1BA-A63B-4846-8538-5D092CA77063.pdf
--- 

BioMed Central
Page 1 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
BMC Medical Education
Open Access
Research article
Scientific writing: a randomized controlled trial comparing 
standard and on-line instruction
Amruta Phadtare1, Anu Bahmani1, Anand Shah2 and Ricardo Pietrobon*3
Address: 1Kalpavriksha Healthcare and Research, 301/A-wing, Saikrupa, Next to Ganesh Chhhaya, Anandnagar, Din Dayal Road, Dombivli West, 
Thane, 421202, Maharashtra, India, 2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia and Duke University Medical Center, DUMC Box 3094, Durham, 
NC, 27710, USA and 3Research on Research, Duke University Health System and Duke NUS Graduate Medical School in Singapore, DUMC Box 
3094, Durham, NC 27710, USA
Email: Amruta Phadtare - dramruta@gmail.com; Anu Bahmani - kalpavrikshha@gmail.com; Anand Shah - anand.shah@alumni.duke.edu; 
Ricardo Pietrobon* - rpietro@duke.edu
* Corresponding author    
Abstract
Background: Writing plays a central role in the communication of scientific ideas and is therefore
a key aspect in researcher education, ultimately determining the success and long-term
sustainability of their careers. Despite the growing popularity of e-learning, we are not aware of
any existing study comparing on-line vs. traditional classroom-based methods for teaching scientific
writing.
Methods: Forty eight participants from a medical, nursing and physiotherapy background from US
and Brazil were randomly assigned to two groups (n = 24 per group): An on-line writing workshop
group (on-line group), in which participants used virtual communication, google docs and standard
writing templates, and a standard writing guidance training (standard group) where participants
received standard instruction without the aid of virtual communication and writing templates. Two
outcomes, manuscript quality was assessed using the scores obtained in Six subgroup analysis scale
as the primary outcome measure, and satisfaction scores with Likert scale were evaluated. To
control for observer variability, inter-observer reliability was assessed using Fleiss's kappa. A post-
hoc analysis comparing rates of communication between mentors and participants was performed.
Nonparametric tests were used to assess intervention efficacy.
Results: Excellent inter-observer reliability among three reviewers was found, with an Intraclass
Correlation Coefficient (ICC) agreement = 0.931882 and ICC consistency = 0.932485. On-line
group had better overall manuscript quality (p = 0.0017, SSQSavg score 75.3 ± 14.21, ranging from
37 to 94) compared to the standard group (47.27 ± 14.64, ranging from 20 to 72). Participant
satisfaction was higher in the on-line group (4.3 ± 0.73) compared to the standard group (3.09 ±
1.11) (p = 0.001). The standard group also had fewer communication events compared to the on-
line group (0.91 ± 0.81 vs. 2.05 ± 1.23; p = 0.0219).
Conclusion: Our protocol for on-line scientific writing instruction is better than standard face-to-
face instruction in terms of writing quality and student satisfaction. Future studies should evaluate
the protocol efficacy in larger longitudinal cohorts involving participants from different languages.
Published: 27 May 2009
BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
doi:10.1186/1472-6920-9-27
Received: 9 July 2008
Accepted: 27 May 2009
This article is available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
© 2009 Phadtare et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), 
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.


BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 2 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
Background
Scientific writing is the primary way used by researchers to
communicate their findings and project ideas to peers and
the general public. Essential for determining their career
progress and sustainability, researchers might fail in situ-
ations where their science is good but not communicated
in a clear and persuasive manner. [1-4] Although multiple
previous studies have compared on-line and traditional
training methodologies, [5-10] we are not aware of previ-
ous studies comparing different methodologies to the
training of researchers in scientific writing.
Traditional methods of instruction such as classroom
training, seminars and workshops, are inherently inflexi-
ble in terms of scheduling, location and customizability.
Moreover, they are often perceived as outdated, boring,
impersonal, and inapplicable to the real-world demands
of the workplace. [11-15] Writing in collaboration tends
to be superior to writing in isolation, as individual
strengths are pooled and deficiencies improved, [16] hav-
ing also been shown to increase publication rates among
faculty members.[17] Although shared collegial authority
is a feature of collaborative writing, [18] geographically
dispersed teams face significant barriers related to dissent
on content, hostility within the group and disagreement
on strategy.[5] In addition, divergent backgrounds, asyn-
chronous feedback, and communication issues all can
affect a group's progress.[6]
The need for new instructional tools and techniques to
overcome these limitations [19] has resulted in the rise of
distance learning, e-learning, and virtual simulation. Dis-
tance education is promising since it is independent of
time and place, reducing dissemination costs, multiplying
learning opportunities, and eliminating travel time and
related expenses.[19] For example, rather than having to
follow a rigid class schedule, distance learners can receive
course materials at home, enabling them to review mate-
rials and complete assignments with greater flexibility.
Distance education is most useful when students and
teachers are physically separated, requiring a technology-
dependent interface.[19] As an extension of distance edu-
cation, e-learning involves the delivery of course materials
and the completion of assignments via the internet, fre-
quently using streaming media (audio/video), live Web-
casts, hyperlinked data and various other communication
tools such as chat rooms, instant messaging, and video-
conferencing.[20] A recent comparison of Web-based and
face-to-face graduate curricula favored the Web-based
course in terms of lower dropout rates and increased flex-
ibility, affordability and attractiveness to students.[9] In
addition, this evolving methodology allows for time/
space flexibility, [21] wide accessibility, frequent contact
among students and teachers, [7] and individual custom-
ization. [22] Potentially improving interaction, collabora-
tion and feedback. Despite its advantages, Web-based
learning has drawbacks, including feelings of isolation,
frustration with unfamiliar practices, [8,20] lack of neces-
sary infrastructure, and new costs associated with on-line
courses.
Despite the paucity of evidence supporting its effective-
ness in scientific writing instruction, a substantial increase
in e-learning seems inevitable. It is therefore imperative to
compare its efficacy with traditional instruction. This may
ultimately contribute to the improvement of e-learning
methods. Previous studies have compared Web-based and
traditional classroom instruction. However, these studies
have focused exclusively on student performance, [22,23]
internet-based degree and certificate programs, [24] reac-
tions of college staff to surveys, [25] and student
grades.[26] They have also been applied narrowly to grad-
uate-level courses in learning disabilities.[10] These stud-
ies did not address the specific issues surrounding on-line
scientific writing instruction.
Our study used a randomized controlled trial design to
compare on-line and traditional methods of instruction
for training novice researchers in scientific writing. Out-
comes included measurements of text quality, participant-
mentor communication events and participant satisfac-
tion.
Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited from second and third year
programs in medical, nursing and physiotherapy schools
in the United States and Brazil, all receiving informed con-
sent prior to the initiation of study activities. The study
was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Duke
University and conducted between 2005 and 2007.
Inclusion criteria
We recruited novice researchers with minimal previous
scientific writing experience and no previous publications
in Medline indexed journals. All eligible participants were
enrolled, with no further exclusion criteria.
Sample Size
Based on a pilot study of nine medical students writing
manuscripts with our research group http://www.resear
chonresearch.org, we estimated a standard deviation of 15
points in the SSQS. Assuming a 20% difference between
groups, the minimum sample size was estimated to be 22
participants per group, or 44 in all. To allow for attrition,
our final sample size was set at 48.
Randomization, Sequence Generation and Concealment
Random numbers were generated with GNU-R http://
www.r-project.org/, using a 1:1 proportion, blocks of


BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 3 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
eight individuals, and stratification based on program of
origin (nursing, physical therapy, and medicine). An ini-
tial randomization schedule was generated for 48 partici-
pants, followed by a sequence of size 15 to account for
dropouts. Group assignments were placed in sealed enve-
lopes and revealed after participants had signed informed
consent. To ensure bliding, assignments were disclosed to
analysts only after the results had been delivered. After
stratified randomization, half of the pairs were assigned to
the standard instruction course, while the other half were
assigned to the on-line group.
Interventions & Implementation
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two set-
tings: standard writing guidance and an on-line writing
workshop.
On-line writing workshop group
In this group, the primary tools of instruction were Pow-
erPoint presentations and audio conferences, supple-
mented by email, Google Docs and writing templates.
Instructions for installing software, using Voice Over the
Internet 
Protocol 
(VoIP) 
applications 
http://
www.skype.com/ and working with manuscript templates
http://www.researchonresearch.org/?q=node/14 
were
provided via email and PowerPoint presentations. Partic-
ipants wrote their manuscripts using the Web-based word
processor 
Writely 
(now 
Google 
Docs 
– 
http://
docs.google.com/), and used VoIP applications, instant
messaging and email to communicate with their mentors.
After an initial session of instruction, mentors contacted
students twice a week by email, with virtual meetings
scheduled as needed. Students used customized writing
templates, populating their manuscripts section by sec-
tion in pre structured layouts. Templates were available
on-line for reference. Google Docs, an open-access, Web-
based word processor that enables collaboration among
any number of researchers, anywhere in the world, was
used to write, review, edit and share manuscripts. This
application allows for synchronous as well as ashynchro-
nous collaborative writing, allowing multiple users to edit
the same source document, with a user-friendly interface.
It archives previous versions along with details of the revi-
sion history, which allows users to compare versions of a
document in different stages of editing. The on-line writ-
ing workshop group procedure is diagrammed in Figure 1.
Standard writing guidance group
In this group, topics were assigned in a classroom setting.
Participants could ask questions at the time of assign-
ment, and they could communicate with instructors by
email or conference call when necessary. Mentors, accessi-
ble by appointment, were assigned to each pair of partici-
pants. Together with their mentors they selected topics of
mutual interest, sometimes complying with existing
course requirements. Participants worked independently,
using concepts and materials presented in class and con-
sulting mentors by telephone. They used standard, com-
puter-based word processing software such as Microsoft
Word http://www.microsoft.com/office/ or Open Office
http://www.openoffice.org/ to write their papers.
Mentor allocation, research question assignment and
manuscript writing were executed in the same manner in
both groups. In both groups, pairs of participants worked
together to complete either the Introduction or Discus-
sion section of a manuscript. On-line course materials
were in English, while mentor support was provided in
English and Portuguese.
Outcomes and assessment strategies
Outcome variables consisted of manuscript quality and
self-reported participant satisfaction. The quality of each
manuscript was evaluated according to well-defined
parameters using the Six-Subgroup Quality Scale (SSQS).
[27] [see Additional file 1]. These parameters assessed the
manuscripts' structure, application of research principles,
and sequential flow of information. For manuscripts writ-
ten in Portuguese, a bilingual researcher (RP) ensured that
evaluations were cross-culturally consistent. Self-reported
satisfaction with the overall training experience was meas-
ured using the Likert scale, with participants responding
to statements on a scale of strongly disagreeing to strongly
agreeing. Post hoc analysis evaluated the number of com-
munication events (emails or phone calls) between partic-
ipants and mentors. Evaluations were performed by three
different reviewers. To ensure unbiased findings, statisti-
cal analysis was blinded; with analysts being unaware of
which group participants were assigned to until the study
analysis was complete.
Quality of scientific writing
Manuscripts were analyzed by three expert reviewers: a
nurse, a research technician, and a clinical epidemiologist.
Prior to the study, reviewers participated in a preliminary
session in which they rated ten examples of Introduction
and Discussion sections using the SSQS scale. The scale
included criteria such as focus; logical connection among
portions of text; choice and arrangement of words (reada-
ble vs. awkward); writing mechanics (usage, grammar,
spelling); content (engaged vs. uninvolved, acknowledg-
ment of alternative points of view vs. single-mindedness);
clarity of purpose and appropriateness of tone for the
intended audience (clear vs. unclear purpose, language
and tone appropriate and consistent); organization and
development (support and elaboration, completeness,
correct use of paragraphs); and style (sentence structure,
concision, daring vs. safe). Disagreements were resolved
by consensus. All criteria were graded on a scale of 1 to 5.


BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 4 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
Satisfaction scores
Self-reported satisfaction was measured using a 5-point
Likert scale, participants responding to statements con-
cerning their satisfaction with the course on a scale from
"strongly disagree" to "strongly agree" (1 = Strongly disa-
gree, 2 = Disagree, 3 = Neither agree nor disagree, 4 =
Agree, 5 = Strongly Agree).
Communication events
Communication events were defined as any interactions
between participants and mentors, by email or phone, for
the purpose of discussing manuscripts and receiving feed-
back. This outcome was considered secondary.
Qualitative study
Using a convenience sampling method, we enrolled a sub-
set of 16 novice researchers in a parallel qualitative study
designed to identify the challenges encountered by partic-
ipants in writing scientific manuscripts. They reported
their progress using a prescribed methodology, described
the problems they encountered, and identified their areas
of greatest and least competence. Focus group discussions
were transcribed using conventional qualitative analysis
techniques. The results of this study have been reported
elsewhere. [28]
Covariates
Potential confounding factors included age, gender, mar-
ital status, course of study, previous experience with scien-
tific writing, and choice of writing section (Introduction
or Discussion).
Statistical Methods
Calculations were performed using means and standard
deviations for continuous variables, and frequencies and
percentages for categorical variables. Efficacy was meas-
ured by analyzing the variance of SSSQ and satisfaction
scores. SSQS scores were normalized from 0 to 100. An
intention-to-treat protocol was preserved. We did not pre-
vent students from employing other methods to improve
their writing. Inter-observer reliability was assessed using
Fleiss's kappa, then the two groups were compared by way
of non-parametric tests for each domain of the SSQS
scales using Intercooled Stata. Analysis was performed
with GNU-R. A combination of kappa statistics was used
to measure inter-observer reliability. This was followed by
non-parametric tests comparing the groups' scores.
Results
Participant Flow
63 participants were initially enrolled after signing
informed consent, of which 15 dropped out before rand-
omization due to time constraints. The remaining 48 were
randomly assigned to two groups of 24 each.
Recruitment
Participants were recruited between September 2005 and
July 2006, with follow-up ending in November 2007.
Baseline data
There were no statistically significant differences between
groups with respect to age, gender, marital status, course
of study, choice of writing section or previous experience
(Table 1). Participants were balanced regarding gender
distribution, mostly single, and with no previous experi-
ence writing scientific manuscripts. Most participants
used the Introduction as the section used for participation
in this study.
Outcomes and Estimations
Excellent inter-observer reliability was found among the
three reviewers, with an Intraclass Correlation Coefficient
of 0.93. Writing quality measured by the average SSQS for
the on-line group (75.3 ± 14.21, ranging from 37 to 94)
was lower than that of the standard group (47.27 ± 14.64,
ranging from 20–72) (p = 0.0017), and participants in the
on-line group were more satisfied with the experience (4.3
± 0.73, ranging from 3 to 5) than their counterparts in the
Diagrammatic representation of the method implementation
Figure 1
Diagrammatic representation of the method imple-
mentation.


BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 5 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
traditional group (3.09 ± 1.11, ranging from 1 to 5) (p =
0.001).
Post hoc analysis revealed that participants in the tradi-
tional group reported fewer communication events (0.91
± 0.81) than the on-line group (2.05 ± 1.23; p = 0.0219)
(Table 2). Also, participants with previous experience in
scientific writing made fewer errors than participants with
no experience (63.82 ± 18.60 vs. 59.48 ± 20.78 respec-
tively; p = 0.002). Reported satisfaction and quantity of
communication were not significantly affected by previ-
ous experience. For all other variables, including as gen-
der, marital status, course of study, choice of writing
section and attitude toward the writing process, the two
groups were comparable and there were no significant dif-
ferences (Table 3).
Discussion
Our study found that the on-line scientific writing group
performed significantly better than the standard writing
guidance group in terms of writing quality, also reporting
greater overall satisfaction. The on-line group also
reported a greater number of participant-mentor commu-
nication events in the post hoc analysis. Because this was
not the primary objective of this study, it should be inves-
tigated further to understand the effects of on-line learn-
ing 
on 
collaboration 
and 
group 
instruction. 
A
significantly lower error rate occurred among participants
with previous scientific writing experience, but reported
satisfaction was unaffected by writing experience. Inter-
observer reliability for the results of this study was high.
The use of Google Docs clearly enhanced participants'
familiarity with an increasingly popular method of collab-
oration, as well as improving the mentors' efficiency.
Web-based education has become increasingly popular
over the past decade. Multiple studies have evaluated the
effectiveness of Web-based and other computer-assisted
teaching methods. Although they have mainly addressed
distance education, [23,27,29] broad comparisons to this
study are possible, as distance education often includes
Web-based or other computer-assisted education. Signifi-
cant advantages of on-line teaching methods over tradi-
tional 
classroom 
methods 
have 
been 
previously
demonstrated, [28,30-33] on-line instruction producing
enhanced performance, [30,34] cognitive gains and
higher satisfaction, [32] and improved test scores. [31] For
example, in one study [31] students who were provided
with Web-based educational materials obtained higher
scores than those who were not provided with similar
materials. It has also been shown that computer environ-
ments are conducive to the presentation of visual material
that tends to benefit students. [29,35,36] Nurses have
shown a greater willingness to adopt Web-based method-
ologies, [37] and they consider the benefits to far out-
weigh their disadvantages.48
Although studies favoring traditional teaching over on-
line methods do exist, [23] studies yielding neutral results
are more prevalent. A comparison of the two methods in
graduate-level courses in learning disabilities and other
curricula evaluated quality, test scores, cognitive gains,
and student performance, success and satisfaction, find-
ing no significant differences between distance education
using on-line materials and traditional classroom-based
Table 1: Baseline characteristics
Mean(Standard Deviation)
[Range Values]
Baseline characteristics
on-line scientific writing workshop
Standard writing guidance
P value
Age
23.54(+/- 1.50) [9,10,23,27,29,30]
23.17(+/- 1.55) [9,10,23,27,29,30]
0.9248
Gender
0.6892
Female
13/48(27.08%)
14/48(29.17%)
Male
11/48(22.92%)
10/48(20.83%)
Marital status
0.4701
Married
1/48(2.08%)
1/48(2.08%)
Single
23/48(47.92%)
23/48(47.92%)
Course
0.768
Med
13/48(27.83%)
14/48(29.16%)
Nursing
6/48(12.5%)
5/48(10.42%)
PT
5/48(10.42%)
4/48(8.33%)
Previous experience research writing
0.574
No
16/48(33.33%)
18/48(37.5%)
Yes
8/48(16.66%)
5/48(10.42%)
Manuscript section
Introduction
16/48 (33%)
13/48 (27%)
0.685
Discussion
11/48 (22.0%)
8/48 (16.6%)
0.544


BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 6 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
instruction. [10,22,26,38] Since on-line learning is
becoming increasingly prevalent due to its easy scalability
and flexibility in scheduling, even despite its current draw-
backs, on-line teaching methods will likely improve with
the emergence of new Web-based technologies and thus
need constant re-evaluation.
Student satisfaction is an important consideration when
implementing new teaching methods and the present
study finds greater satisfaction with on-line workshops.
Carr, [39] however, found that student satisfaction was
lower in Web-based distance education despite higher
rates of success. The author attributed this result to techni-
cal difficulties, including problems with internet connec-
tion and computer problems requiring the assistance of
engineers, which ultimately resulted in greater time
expenditure by students in the distance learning environ-
ment. Finally, on-line courses can also automate processes
such as test score collation, saving time by reducing fac-
ulty workload and thus providing students with faster
feedback. [40]
Student-mentor communication was higher in the Web-
based group, indicating a more open atmosphere for com-
ments and criticism. Earlier studies evaluating students'
reactions toward distance education have documented
feelings of loneliness and frustration, and have cautioned
against a shift away from traditional modes of group
learning. [41] However, this trend is likely to change as
students that have grown up surrounded by Web applica-
tions as part of their life enter distance learning programs.
These students are more likely to offer critical suggestions,
facilitating beneficial changes to the curriculum. [42,43]
Mixed results for performance advantages and decision
making have been noted on a variety of tasks in computer
mediated versus face-to-face learning environments. [44]
Contributors to these mixed results included factors such
as participants' prior experience with on-line courses,
their grades, [34,37] computer competency, [45] and idi-
osyncratic interactions with a given system of instruction
as well as instructor skills, [46] the presence or absence of
supervision, [47] and the relatively slow diffusion of Web-
based technology as described by Karl Pajo and Catherine
Wallace. [25] Web-based learning is a maturing technol-
ogy, and early studies may have suffered from poor pro-
gram design and students' lack of familiarity with on-line
environments, as shown in a study by Spooner. [29] This
study analyzed student response to the two types of
instruction, and, interestingly, results for one parameter
(class organization) were contradictory: Traditional meth-
ods were rated superior in one of the two courses studied,
while distance education was favored in the other.
The use of Blackboard™ http://www.blackboard.com/, a
Web-based learning system, has been proven effective in
helping students write research papers. [48] However, in
this system, access is limited to registered candidates or
institutions, preventing collaboration with outside
researchers who might be working on the same project.
Also, while the system is useful for tracking students' use
of course materials and monitoring their progress, it is not
open-source and can be costly to implement. The present
study used Google Docs http://docs.google.com/, which
is a freely available interface for sharing, editing, and
tracking on-line documents. We are not aware of any
existing previous study making use of Google Docs for the
purposes of scientific writing. Scientific writing demands
collaboration, in the form of back-and-forth communica-
tion with collaborators, peers, mentors and outside
researchers. Given this requirement, Google Docs is an
excellent solution that precludes the time-consuming
compiling of multiple iterations of text that occurs with
the exchange of documents via email or hard copies.
Despite significant advances in relation to the previous lit-
erature in the field, our study has limitations. First, the
number of potential confounding factors we could track
was limited, and did not include subjects' prior participa-
tion in on-line courses, their grades, [34,37] proficiency
with computers, [45] and interaction with the system of
instruction, as well as instructor skills [46] and the pres-
ence or absence of supervision. [47] Examining these fac-
tors was beyond the scope of this study. Second, our
mentors were not blinded, which may have resulted in
bias. Because it was not possible to maintain blinding in
Table 2: Association between the two groups and the outcomes
Mean
(Standard Deviation)
[Range Values]
Mean
(Standard Deviation)
[Range Values]
Outcome
on-line scientific writing workshop
Standard writing guidance
P value
SSQSavg
75.3(+/- 14.21) [37–94]
47.27(+/- 14.64) [20–72]
0.0017
Satisfaction with method
4.3(+/- 0.73) [3-5]
3.09(+/- 1.11) [1-5]
< 0.001
Number communication events with mentor
2.05(+/- 1.23) [1-6]
0.91(+/- 0.81) [0–3]
0.0219


BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 7 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
the study's early stages, we ensured that the final statistical
analysis was blinded for an unbiased interpretation of the
results. Third, our study did not evaluate participants' per-
ceptions of their own performance. Several earlier studies
have demonstrated that, although the two methods are
comparable in terms of performance, [[9,36,42,43], and
[49]] the same consistency is not seen in the participants'
perceptions of their own performance. [50-52] While the
present study did not include a parameter for self-assess-
ment, reports of satisfaction provide a rough correspond-
ence. Last, our current study used the SSQS scale for
measuring manuscript quality without this scale having a
formal cross-cultural validation. As we did not have a
large enough sample to conduct a stratified analysis, it is
unclear whether language might have affected our out-
comes.
Future studies should address the problems associated
with using imperfect measurement scales such as SSQS,
which is prone to subjective bias, and tools should be
developed to objectively measure writing quality. The lack
of tools to objectively evaluate manuscript quality and
participants' self-assessment makes it difficult to interpret
the results of this type of study. Thus, developing tools
that consistently evaluate participants' perceptions of
their own performance, as well as objective measurements
of the quality of scientific writing, could prove beneficial.
Several other factors are also found to influence the out-
come of this type of study, including participants' previ-
ous experience with on-line courses, their grades, [34,37]
computer competency, [45] and interaction with the sys-
tem in question, as well as instructor skill [46] and the
presence or absence of supervision. [47] Future studies
should enroll participants in sufficient numbers to stratify
comparison groups according to these factors.
Conclusion
This study suggests that the on-line scientific writing
methodology was superior to traditional classroom-based
instruction, which suggests that reservations concerning
Web-based instruction should be reconsidered. Web-
based workshops also resulted in reports of greater satis-
faction among participants, although the generalization
of this result should be tested in future studies. We there-
fore strongly encourage the use of on-line environment to
provide a highly scalable method to educate the next gen-
eration of biomedical research.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
AP-participated in manuscript writing and critical analysis
of results. AB-participated in manuscript writing and crit-
ical analysis. AS-performed data analysis, participated in
study design and manuscript review. RP-designed and
conducted the study and reviewed the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Table 3: Post hoc analysis of outcomes and other variables
Number communication events
Satisfaction
Predictors
P-values
Mean
(Standard Deviation)
Range Values
P-values
Mean
(Standard Deviation)
Range Values
P-values
Enjoys writing
0.5881
0.972
0.8264
1
1 +/-(1) 0–2
2.67+/-(1.52) 1–4
2
1.14 +/-(0.69) 0–2
3.71+/-(1.49) 1–5
3
1.94 +/-(1.43) 0–6
3.82+/-(0.95) 0–2
4
1.08 +/-(0.99) 0–3
3.67+/-(0.98) 2–5
5
1.33 +/-(0.57) 1–2
3.67+/-(1.52) 2–5
Gender
0.1028
0.3819
0.8127
Female
1.52 +/-(1.32) 0–6
3.6 +/-(1.22) 1–5
Male
1.35 +/-(0.93) 0–4
3.76+/-(0.97) 2–5
Marital status
0.289
0.9655
0.7156
Married
1.5 +/-(0.70) 1–2
4 4–4
Single
1.45 +/-(1.19) 0–6
3.65+/-(1.14) 1–5
Course
0.5727
0.4723
0.05372
Med
1.44 +/-(1.04) 0–4
3.4 +/-(1.08) 1–5
Nursing
1.87 +/-(1.88) 0–6
4.25+/-(0.70) 3–5
PT
1.11 +/-(0.60) 0–2
3.89+/-(1.36) 1–5
Previous experience research writing
0.002
0.1046
0.3920
No
1.29 +/-(1.00) 0–4
3.61+/-(1.05) 1–5
Yes
1.91 +/-(1.51) 0–6
3.82+/-(1.32) 1–5


BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 8 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
Additional material
Acknowledgements
This publication was made possible by
1. Grant Number 1 UL1 RR024128-01 from the National Center for 
Research Resources (NCRR), a component of the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), and NIH Roadmap for Medical Research. Its contents are 
solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the 
official view of NCRR or NIH. Information on NCRR is available at http://
www.ncrr.nih.gov/. Information on Re-engineering the Clinical Research 
Enterprise can be obtained from http://nihroadmap.nih.gov/clinicalresearch/
overview-translational.asp
2. DU CIT Scientific Writing Workshop using On-line Instructional Tech-
nology, Surgery, School of Nursing, Physical and Occupational Therapy, 
Community and Family Medicine.
References
1.
Peh WCG: Scientific writing and publishing: its importance to
radiologists.  Biomed Imaging Interv J 2007, 3:e55.
2.
Rothman K: Writing for epidemiology.  Epidemiology 1998,
9:333-7.
3.
David AS: How to do it: write a classic paper.  BMJ 1990,
300:30-31.
4.
Day R, Gastel B: How to write and publish a scientific paper.
6th edition. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press; 2006. 
5.
Hinds PJ, Bailey DE: Out of sight, out of sync: Understanding
conflict in distributed teams.  Organization Science 2003,
14(6):615-632.
6.
Gennari JH, Weng C, Benedetti J, McDonald DW: Asynchronous
communication among clinical researchers: A study for sys-
tems design.  Int J Med Inform 2005, 74(10):797-807.
7.
Cole RA: Issues in Web-based pedagogy: A critical primer.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press; 2000. 
8.
Cook D: Web-based learning: pros, cons and controversies.
Clin Med 2007, 7:37-42.
9.
Horiuchi S, Yukari Y, Miki K, Yumi S, Kazuhiro N: Evaluation of a
Web-based graduate continuing nursing education program
in Japan: A randomized controlled trial.  Nurse Education Today
2008, 29(2):140-149.
10.
Tinnerman L: A Comparative Study Between Traditional and
Distance Education Instructional Environments Involving
Two Graduate Level Learning Disabilities Classes.  Interna-
tional Journal of Instructional Technology and Learning 2006, 3(3):1-64.
11.
Diamond R: Broad curriculum reform is needed if students
are to master core skills.  Chronicle of Higher Education 1997,
43(47):B7.
12.
Gardiner LF: Producing dramatic increases in student learn-
ing: Can we do it?  National Teaching and Learning Forum 1997,
6(2):8-10.
13.
Charles H: A proper education.  Change 1998, 30:12-19.
14.
Roueche JE: American Imperative-Essay, Virtual Library".
1998.
15.
Wingspread Group on Higher Education: An American Impera-
tive: Higher Expectations for Higher Education.  Racine, WI:
The Johnson Foundation, Inc; 1993. 
16.
Group work and collaborative writing   [http://dhc.ucdavis.edu/
vohs/sec11.html]
17.
Grzybowski SCW, Bates J, Calam B, Alred J, Martin RE, Andrew R,
Rieb L, Harris S, Wiebe C, Knell E, Berger S: A physician peer sup-
port writing group.  FamMed 2003, 35(3):195-201.
18.
Galligan L, Cretchley P, George L, Martin McDonald K, McDonald J,
Rankin J: Evolution and emerging trends of university writing
groups.  Queensland Journal of Educational Research 2003,
19(1):28-41.
19.
Glenn AS: A Comparison of Distance Learning and Tradi-
tional Learning Environments.  2001 [http://www.eric.ed.goER-
ICWebPortal/custom/portlets/recordDetails/detailm
ini.jsp?_nfpb=true&_&ERICExtSearch_SearchValue_0=ED457778&E
RICExtSearch_SearchType_0=no&accno=ED457778].
20.
McKimm J, Jollie C, Cantillon P: ABC of learning and teaching:
Web based learning.  BMJ 2003, 326:870-873.
21.
Takiya S, Archbold J, Berge ZL: Flexible training's intrusion on
work/life balance.  Turkish on-line Journal of Distance Education 2005,
6(2): [http://tojde.anadolu.edu.tr/tojde18/articles/article5.htm].
22.
Mehlenbacher B, Miller CR, Covington D, Larsen JS: Active and
interactive learning on-line: a comparison of Web-based and
conventional writing classes.  Professional Communication, IEEE
Transactions 2000, 43:166-184.
23.
Sawyer T: The effects of computerized and conventional
study guides on achievement in college students.  Journal of
Computer-Based Instruction 1998, 15(3):80-8.
24.
Wallace DR, Mutooni P: A comparative evaluation of World
Wide Web-based and classroom teaching.  J Eng Educ 1997,
86(3):211-219.
25.
Pajo K, Wallace C: Barriers to the uptake of Web-based tech-
nology by university teachers.  Journal of Distance Education/Revue
de l'enseignement à distance 2001, 16(1):70-84.
26.
Roach V, Lemasters L: Satisfaction with on-line learning: A
comparative descriptive study.  Journal of Interactive on-line Learn-
ing 2006, 5(3):317-332.
27.
Ransdell S, Levy CM: Working memory constraints on writing
quality and fluency.  In The science of writing Edited by: Levy CM,
Ransdell S. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1996:93-105. 
28.
Shah J, Shah A, Pietrobon R: Scientific writing of novice
researchers: what difficulties and encouragements do they
encounter.  Academic medicine: Journal of the Association of American
Medical Colleges 2009, 84(4):511-6.
29.
Spooner F, Jordan L, Algozzine B, Spooner M: Student ratings of
instruction in distance learning and on-campus classes.  Jour-
nal of Educational Research 1999, 92:132-40.
30.
Smeaton A, Keogh G: An analysis of the use of virtual delivery
of undergraduate lectures.  Computers and Education 1999,
32(1):83-94.
31.
Ochoa J: Randomized Comparison Between Traditional and
Traditional Plus Interactive Web-Based Methods for Teach-
ing Seizure Disorders.  Teach Learn Med 2008, 20(2):114-117.
32.
Jeffries P: Computer versus lecture: A comparison of two
methods of teaching oral medication administration in a
nursing skills laboratory.  Journal of Nursing Education 2001,
40(7):323-29.
33.
Griffin J: Technology in the teaching of Neuroscience:
enhanced students learning.  ADV PHYSIOL EDUC 2003,
27:146-155.
34.
Dutton J: Characteristics and Performance of Students in an
on-line Section of Business Statistics.  Journal of Statistics Educa-
tion 2005, 13(3): [http://www.amstat.org/publications/jse/v13n3/dut
ton.html].
35.
Pietrobon R, Guller U, Martins H, Menezes AP, Higgins LD, Jacobs
DO: A suite of Web applications to streamline the interdisci-
plinary collaboration in secondary data analyses.  BMC Medical
Research Methodology 2004, 4(1):29.
36.
Welsh J, Null C: The effects of computer-based instruction on
college students' comprehension of classic research.  Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers 1991, 23:301-305.
37.
Huckstadt A: Evaluation of interactive on-line courses for
advanced practice nurses.  J Am Acad Nurse Pract 2005,
17(3):85-9.
38.
Schoech D, Helton D: Qualitative and quantitative analysis of a
course taught via classroom and internet chatroom.  Qualita-
tive Soc Work 2002, 1:111-124.
39.
Sarah C: on-line psychology instruction is effective, but not
satisfying, study finds.  The Chronicle of Higher Education 2000,
46(27):A48.
Additional file 1
Six Sub Group Quality Scale. This scale provided was used to assess 
manuscript quality, which was a primary outcome.
Click here for file
[http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/1472-
6920-9-27-S1.doc]


Publish with BioMed Central   and  every 
scientist can read your work free of charge
"BioMed Central will be the most significant development for 
disseminating the results of biomedical research in our lifetime."
Sir Paul Nurse, Cancer Research UK
Your research papers will be:
available free of charge to the entire biomedical community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central 
yours — you keep the copyright
Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/info/publishing_adv.asp
BioMedcentral
BMC Medical Education 2009, 9:27
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27
Page 9 of 9
(page number not for citation purposes)
40.
Anderson H: On-line Student Course Evaluations: Review of
Literature and a Pilot Study.  American Journal of Pharmaceutical
Education 2005, 69(1): [http://www.ajpe.org].
41.
Hara N, Kling R: Student's frustrations with a Web-based dis-
tance education course.  First Monday 1999, 4(12): [http://
www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue4_12/hara/index.html].
42.
Layne BH, DeCristofor JR, McGinty D: Electronic versus tradi-
tional student ratings of instruction.  Res Higher Educ 1999,
40:221-32.
43.
Kasiar JB, Schroeder SL, Holstad SG: Comparison of traditional
and Web-based course evaluation processes in a required,
team-taught pharmacotherapy course.  Am J Pharm Educ 2001,
63:268-70.
44.
Luppicini R: Review of computer mediated communication
research for education.  Instructional Science 2007, 35(2):141-185.
45.
Wojciechowski A: Individual Student Characteristics: Can Any
Be Predictors Of Success In on-line Classes?  Journal of Distance
Learning Administration 2005, VIII(II): [http://www.westga.edu/~dis
tance/ojdla/summer82/wojciechowski82.htm].
46.
Wellman G: Comparing Learning Style to Performance in On-
Line Teaching: Impact of Proctored vs. Un-Proctored Test-
ing.  Journal of Interactive on-line Learning 2005, 4(1):20-39.
47.
Meyer K: Face-to-Face versus threaded discussions:The role
of time and higher order thinking.  JALN 2003, 7(3):55-65.
48.
Stone V: Delivery of Web-based instruction using Blackboard:
a collaborative project.  J Med Libr Assoc 2004, 92(3):375-77.
49.
Russell T: The No Significant Difference Phenomenon.  1999
[http://www.nosignificantdifference.org/]. North Carolina State Uni-
versity, Raleigh, NC, USA
50.
Schoech D: Teaching over the Internet: Results of one doc-
toral course.  Research on Social Work Practice 2000, 10:467-487.
51.
Sonner BS: Success in the capstone business course – Assess-
ing the effectiveness of distance learning.  Journal of Education for
Business 1999, 74:243-247.
52.
Bower B: Distance education: Facing the faculty challenge.
Journal of Distance Learning Administration 2001, 4(2): [http://
www.westga.edu/~distance/ojdla/summer42/bower42.html].
Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6920/9/27/prepub
