--- 
source: 74B34519-F34A-4A13-AD7E-C07867FA5D1B.pdf
--- 

World Applied Sciences Journal 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
ISSN 1818-4952
© IDOSI Publications, 2008
Corresponding Author:
M. Alivand, GIS Department, Faculty of Geodesy and Geomatics Eng., 
K.N.Toosi University of Technology
25
New Method for Finding Optimal Path in Dynamic Networks
M. Alivand, A.A. Alesheikh and M.R. Malek
Department of GIS, K.N.Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
Abstract: Nowadays, urban traffic congestion is a complicated and ubiquitous problem. Continuous changes
of traffic congestion with respect to the time lead to change the travel times of transportation network. These
changes show the importance of time in transportation analyses in addition to the location. So determining the
optimal path in a time-dependent transportation network is a challenging task.This article proposes the spatial
analysis of finding the optimal path between two specific locations in a network that its traffic congestion
changes continuously. Conventional algorithms are analyzed, and their features and constraints are evaluated.
Then, a new method based on the partitioning space-time is presented. In the proposed method, some heuristic
functions which are extracted from graph features have been used to guide the solution in each partition.
Finally, a business model for collecting traffic data is introduced. Using this model could help the traffic
managers to have real-time traffic data in different times and locations. Also, it could help the users to obtain
the best route in their urban trips using GIS analyses like finding the optimal path.
Key words:  Optimal Path Finding
 Transportation Networks  Partitioning space-time  Heuristic methods
 Mobile GIS
INTRODUCTION
However, many of human daily activities contain time
The main characteristics of GIS that differentiate it
is transportation. In activities related to transportation,
from other information systems are its spatial data and
information changes both in space and time. Webster’s
geo-statistical analyses [1]. Such analytical functions
dictionary defines transportation as “a means of
usually present the best solutions to the users of GIS.
conveyance or travel from one place to another”. This
Integration of these analyses with high visualization
definition implies that location and dynamics (movement
capabilities lead GIS to be widely used in decision making
in time) are critical components in transportation [5]. So,
process [2].
for solving many of transportation problems, the time
The last decade has witnessed the rapid emergence
constraints must be observed, in addition to spatial
of Internet-enabled mobile terminals, mobile computing,
features. Considering this issue is very obvious in mobile
location aware technologies like GPS, and GIS capabilities.
GIS because the user is moving and its location is a
As a result of this integration, a new generation of GIS
function of time in addition to space. Consequently,
named mobile GIS have been developed which are capable
solving many of analyses in mobile GIS needs time to be
of delivering geographic information and analyses to
accounted for calculations [4].
mobile users via the Internet and wireless networks [3].
Finding the optimal path is one of the most important
Generally, Mobile Geospatial Information Systems (MGIS)
analyses which are used in mobile GIS [2]. It is also one of
is a type of GIS which its main research is about non-
the widely used applications in transportation problems.
geographic moving object in geographical space. This
Finding optimal path is defined as “How to determine the
research works on relationship between moving object
optimal path from one or more places in network to other
and geographic entity, or moving object between another
locations.”
moving object. The main difference between a mobile GIS
In many researches for finding the optimal path, time
and traditional (static) GIS is the existence of a mobile
is regarded as a static parameter that leads to obtain
agent [1].
similar  solutions for a shortest path problem in different
in addition to space [4]. One of these important activities


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
26
times [6]. Since traffic congestion changes continuously
graph is the sum of the lengths of the edges on the path.
in a transportation network, so travel time of the links
An optimal path (or shortest path) between a pair of
changes continuously in all the network locations. If the
vertices O and D in a weighted directed graph is a path
user needs to find a path with minimum travel time based
from O to D with the least length [9].
on cost of travel, the previous methods will lose their
Conceptually, the optimal path finding could be
efficiency and new algorithms must be developed in
differentiated in a static network (with putting constant
dynamic networks.The current article examines the spatial
costs for links for traversing the network), and optimal
analysis of finding optimal path between two specific
path finding in a dynamic network (with putting variable
locations in a network which its traffic congestion
costs for links for traversing the network).
changes continuously and a new algorithm based on
partitioning space-time is proposed.
Optimal Path Finding Algorithms in Static Networks:
Optimal Path Between Two Specific Locations: Network
called static network. In this state, the weight of all links
analysis for transportation purposes is a common GIS
is considered as fixed and the problem is solved globally
practice. One of the most famous network analyses is
for finding the optimal path between two nodes. Optimal
finding the shortest path which delivers optimal path to
path finding in static networks have been studied a lot
the users based on the conventional algorithms. These
during the years [3,4,9]. Many algorithms have been
algorithms determine the shortest path from a specific
proposed for solving this problem. These algorithms are
point to the other locations of a network. Generally,
divided to one-to-one, one-to-all and all-to-all [3].
finding the shortest path is a type of optimization
Traditional softwares which solve shortest path in a static
problems.
network, usually calculate all-to-all shortest paths for all
Finding shortest path between two specific locations
nodes and answer all the shortest paths questions based
is performed for ages. The first efforts for presenting a
on them. The main basis of these algorithms is similar, and
mathematical model for solving this problem were done by
is based on Dijkstra’s method.
Euler and graph theory was proposed for modeling
network representation and analysis. In 1959, Dijkstra
Transportation Networks: Nowadays GIS faces more and
suggested an algorithm for finding the shortest path
more complex spatial-temporal queries; so time is regarded
which were used as the basic algorithm for many other
as a crucial component of GIS data models for solving
algorithms up to now [7]. 
spatial-temporal problems [5]. Sinton [4] defined time as a
Definition of Optimal Path: It can be said that the optimal
Nevertheless, after more than 25 years, time is not
path is variable for different people. For example, the best
examined much as an integral part of GIS.
route for a person who is finding a specific place in an
In all the solutions for static shortest path that
unknown city, maybe the one which the probability of
described in previous section, time is removed from the
losing will be the least [8]. Since the mobile users of
process of solving the problem. If the goal is to find the
transportation network want to find a path with minimum
optimal route between two nodes with cost function on
time as cost, the optimal path is considered as finding a
distance, it can be said that the problem would always
path between two specific points in transportation
have only one solution, but people want to receive
network which needs minimum time to traverse.
optimal route based on travel time of each link as cost
Graph Theory and Optimal Path: A weighted directed
attention to changing time continuously which may cause
graph (or network) is a directed graph G(N,A) with real
wrong answers using the aforementioned static solutions
valued weights or lengths assigned to each edge [9]. N is
[3].
a set of elements called nodes or vertices, and A is a set
A network that its links’ weights change with respect
of unordered pairs of members of N called arcs or links
to time is called Dynamic Network. Transportation
[9]. The nodes of the graph are shown as points, while the
network is a type of networks that have dynamic features
edges are shown as lines connecting pairs of points.
which need more complex methods for solving the optimal
Equivalently, a weighted graph is a triple (N, A, w) where
path problem than static one. The most important
w is the weight of network links and maps the elements of
parameter in transportation networks is travel time of each
E into real. The length of a path in a weighted directed
link Travel time of each link is a function of traffic
The network which the weights of its links are constant is
necessary component for solving spatial problems.
function. Consequently, new problems will arise with


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
27
congestion.
Since 
traffic 
conditions 
changes
that the current traffic data are available from the
continuously with respect to time, travel times change
beginning, so the third path is better than the total travel
continuously. So it is important to consider the time as an
time of the first and second paths. The occurred
important parameter for finding the optimal path in
conditions, shows the much deviation of the path in the
dynamic networks. 
node A. In other words, that node has a high risk of
Many researchers have worked in shortest path
deviation when it faces severe traffic congestions.
problem in dynamic networks [3,6,10]. Generally the
These constraints in previous algorithms lead to
optimal path algorithms in dynamic state can be
some unreliability in dynamic optimal path analysis. 
categorized into two classes [11]:
1.
Time-dependent
shortest path problem which
one of those cities that have a lot of traffic problems.
network characteristics change with time in a
Traffic congestion imposes lots of economical and mental
predictable fashion. In this type, each link has a
damages to the people. If suitable services can be
predictable function of travel time with respect to
presented to the users for finding optimal path with
time.
minimum time as cost function, then, it would prevents
2.
Recalculation of optimal path due to consecutive,
wasting the people’s time in addition to decreasing traffic
instantaneous and unpredictable changes in network
congestions. Now, there are few data from the different
data. Current methods solve this issue with re-
places of transportation network of Tehran. These data
optimization of a set of closely-related static shortest
are gathered from some resources like computer vision
path problems.
and inductive loops, and etc. They only install in some
Both of these algorithms have some problems and
constant places of network and couldn’t sense in all
constraints which are examined in the next section.
locations and times; so, they do not present full spatial-
Problems of Optimal Path Finding Analysis in Dynamic
different times of days and weeks, in addition to their low
Networks: The first method needs many traffic data from
accuracy [12].
different time and locations of the network in addition to
As a result, using a traffic prediction function as
continuous calculation the prediction function. If exact
stated before, adds high unreliability to the computations
traffic data were available an exact prediction function in
(that has uncertainties itself). In this case, it may be better
different times could be integrated with conventional
to present another patterns for finding the optimal path in
algorithms for obtaining the optimal solution [6]. Since
dynamic transportation network of Tehran. This new
these traffic data do not be existed in many networks this
pattern is based on a new vision that adapts the situation
method is not applicable for most of the cities. Also
of transportation network of Tehran. In this method, the
existence
of many instantaneous phenomenon like
goal is to find a path that have few variance rather than
accidents, roads constructions and special events lead to
the optimal path with current data, but if the traffic
some disturbances in traffic prediction function which
conditions changed, this path could modify itself with
lead to the optimal solution does not achieve. So this
minimum changes in total time with respect to the current
method could not be used in many transportation
path. In other words, a path is selected as optimum which
networks.
if accidents occur in that path, more paths will be
The second method recalculates a new optimal path
generated from it to the destination. 
from the current location when traffic conditions change
in the previous path. This method have been examined a
Local Optimization: It is widely believed that in order to
lot because of the problems of the first method [3,10].
solve large scale global optimization problems an
Nevertheless, this method has some problems for finding
appropriate mixture of local approximation and global
a reliable path as well. Figure 1 shows the problems of
exploration is necessary. Optimal path finding in dynamic
using the path recalculation method. In this figure, the
transportation networks is on of those optimization
first path is the one that is provided to the user from the
problems that could be solved better using local
beginning. Then because of traffic changes, recalculating
characteristics [5].
algorithm have been used, and the second path have been
Characteristics of dynamic networks and problems of
provided  from  the  determined node (A). Now,  suppose
shortest path analysis in Tehran have examined until now
Constraints of Optimal Path Finding in Tehran: ehran is
temporal coverage in different places of network and


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
28
[13]. Now an algorithm is proposed for finding the optimal
continuous time to smaller time intervals which traffic
path for the users which have navigational tools in their
condition is constant in those intervals. Now, the space
cars.
must be partitioned according to time divisions that lead
The following features can be occurred in finding the
to a partitioned space-time environment.
optimal path in cities like Tehran:
Figure 2 shows the first partition and the shortest
1.
Users are moving
Figure 3 shows whole partitions which could be obtained
2.
Users do the shortest path analysis with a mobile
using the end node of each partition.
terminal attached to a GPS
The second and the most important point is finding
3.
Users need shortest path analysis in an unknown
the appropriate path in each partition. This solving must
environment
be such that the total provided paths in partitions do not
4.
Users do not have the data (map, traffic and so on)
deviate from the global optimally. The following example
5.
Traffic data does not exist in some regions
illustrates this problem.
6.
Real-time data are updated continuously on-line.
Figure 4 shows a symbolic representation of a city. In
Above situations almost occur in all optimal path
computed from A to the central point of city K. It could be
analysis in Tehran. They are features of a Mobile
seen that the region is organized from small partitions.
Environment that is based on mobile computing concepts
Now, if the problem solved by local optimization, the
[14,15]. In these environments, some algorithms based on
determined path in Fig. 5 will be provided because it seeks
partitioning space-time in continuous spaces for solving
the minimum weight link to traverse (this approach is the
spatial problems have examined [14,15]. In such system
basis of Greedy method); instead, the global solving of
that designed by Malek [15], current location of the user
problem leads to determined path in Fig. 6.
is determined by GPS and analyses is done in partitions of
Consequently, if each partition solved independently,
spaces and times in continuous space. In this section the
the optimal solution would not be obtained. So, to reach
idea of partitioning space-time in network models has
optimal solution it needs to integrate this method with
been introduced. Using this method needs to use the local
heuristic methods. With this integration, optimal solution
characteristics in determining the solution. In this method,
in each partition could be guided to destination. The
the space of problem is divided to partitions and then
features that could be used as heuristic are extracted from
shortest path analysis is done in each partition step by
graph theory and will be explained in the next section.
step until reaching the destination. This method will be
more effective when there are some paths between origin
Solutions for Integration of Partitioning and Heuristic
and destination that have few time variances [10].
Methods: After partitioning space and time, shortest path
Finding the Optimal Path with Partitioning: The firs
partition because it will make the answer far from being
problem for finding the optimal path with partitioning is to
optimally(like the above example in greedy method). For
partition space and time. There are different methods for
solving this problem, in each step a final node should be
partitioning space-time that could be divided into
selected for each partition which is the first node of the
methods based on systematic and non-systematic
second partition. The final node of each partition must be
partitions [9,14] In systematic approaches, space of
selected in a way that it would be on the destination
problem divides to regular shapes. Greedy, tree and quad-
direction to ensure that the provided path in each
tree methods are placed into these group. Non-systematic
partition is guided to the destination correctly. Thus,
procedures which are more realistic with respect to the
functions that hold the direction must be used as
irregularity of time changing, divide space to unordered
heuristics. To obtain this heuristic, each final node at each
shapes. Partitioning space with Separator theorem is
partition could be related with a parameter which equals
contained in this method which is the basis for many
to direct distance to the destination (like the A* method
algorithms like parallel algorithms for solving shortest
for finding ht shortest path). In this case, the nodes that
path problems [9]. Also some new methods based on
have lower direct distance to the destination could have
Accessibility theory have mentioned recently [16]. 
higher weight in the computations. Also, first shortest
One of the methods for finding the optimal path in
path could be obtained globally without partitioning, and
dynamic networks is based on discretization of
then a path is calculated in each partition which has the 
path  from the specific origin to specific destination.
this city the shortest path with minimum cost should be
analysis could not be used independently in each


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
29
Fig. 1: The problems of path recalculation method for finding the optimal path
Fig. 2: Shortest path and first Partition
Fig.  3: Partitioning whole space-time
A


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
30
Fig. 4: The partitioned City
Fig. 5: Selected path with respect to local features
Fig. 6: Selected path with global features 


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
31
minimum angle deviation from the global shortest path.
could be sent to the users via mobile communication
After providing final node of the first partition with
respect to the above criteria, start solving the problem in
the  second  partition  until  reaching the last partition
(Fig. 7). 
As a result, first the necessary parameters for using
in optimization problem will be obtained; then, the
relevant cost function is determined with attention to
these parameters that is a linear function. Now, the goal is
to minimize the determined cost function.
The advantage of this method is that the space of
problem is divided to smaller partitions, and only the
traffic data of that partition is needed. So, at the time of
solving the first partition, if an event occurs in other
partitions, data of those partitions is updated before
reaching the mobile user to them, and at the time of
computations of that partition the updated traffic data will
be examined.
A Business Scenario for Providing Traffic Data: It stated
that in partitioning method traffic data of each partition
are updated continuously before reaching the mobile
agent to that partition. Now, resources of collecting traffic
data are limited. Only a set of static sensors are placed
into limited parts of network for estimating traffic volume
which does not have high precision to estimate travel
times at networks. Also, because of local limitations for
installing these sensors, the collected data do not involve
suitable spatial-temporal coverage. Using mobile cars as
distributed mobile sensors is proposed by many
researchers to solve this problem [12].
Collecting Traffic Data with Distributed Mobile Sensors:
In this method, GPS is installed on some floating car data
(FCD) in the network [12]. These GPS provide location
data, instantaneous velocity and time, and store in a
temporary memory. Then, these data will be sent to traffic
management center via mobile communications for
calculating travel time parameter in network (that is useful
for shortest path analysis). Shortest path analysis could
be run either in traffic center or in mobile client’s
computer. This is a type of smart client architecture that
could be used both thin and thick client architecture [2].
Travel time of each link will gain from the time
difference between first and final nodes of that link which
GPS is registered [2]. These data will be sent to the center
real-time
and after on-line computation of these
distributed mobile data together, travel times will send to
the  users.  These  data  could be placed into Internet or
network [2]. Since installing and using these equipments
have high costs, and also lack of an efficient system for
exact management of these data, a business scenario for
collecting traffic data with the use of spatial analysis has
presented [12].
Introducing the Business Scenario: In this model, users
that need on-line GIS’s analyses in dynamic networks like
finding optimal path, collect real-time traffic data
themselves in the path. Users that need for such spatial
analysis usually have equipments like GPS, pocket PC and
etc in their own car; thus, they do not need to pay for
installing these equipments, and only they pay for the
communication to the center (with conventional
approaches like Web) for sending the collected data will
be paid [17]. Instead, they also can access to the suitable
and efficient spatial analyses with attention to real-time
collected traffic data. So, we send these analyses to
people who gather traffic data, and it depends on interests
of people for gaining online analysis [12]. To do this a
client/server architecture has been chosen to comply with
the users needs (Fig. 8).
CONCLUSION
Optimal path finding in transportation networks is
one of the most important analyses in Mobile GIS and
LBS. Information changes in transportation networks both
in space and time; so, the solution is affected by time in
addition to location. The cost of traveling is changing
continuously due to traffic variants. So, it is inefficient to
use static approaches for calculating the optimal path in
dynamic networks.
Thus,
dynamic 
methods 
and 
algorithms 
for
computing the optimal path are presented that are based
on discritiztion of time to smaller divisions and using
static algorithms. This case leads to uncertainty on
provided solution. In this paper a new vision based on
partitioning space-time for solving shortest path problem
is proposed. In this vision, heuristic methods in addition
to optimization techniques are used. Implementation and
test of this method shows that this pattern could be used
as a new vision for calculating shortest path. However, to
gain an exact model and algorithm needs more researches
in this topic. Also, additional parameters must be
extracted as new heuristics to choose the best end node
at each partition.


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
32
Fig. 7:
Three paths can be generated in dynamic networks. Finding the third path from the 
beginning could be challenging
Fig. 8: Central Architecture for Implementing the System
Final Path with 
Having the 
Current Situation 
of link’s weight
First path from 
the beginning
The second shortest 
path from the 
second partition
Server
Clients
FCD
GIS Server
Service
GPRS, GSM, SMS,
HTTP, RDS-TMC
Send Services to the Clients
GSM,GPR


World Appl. Sci. J., 3 (Supple 1): 25-33, 2008
33
Finally, due to the lack of suitable traffic data with
8.
Duckham, M., 2003. Simplest Path: Automated
appropriate spatial-temporal coverage, using a business
scenario for collecting traffic data have been proposed
and a confident architecture for implementation have been
explained.
REFERENCES
1.
Li, L., C. Li and Z. Lin, 2002. Investigation on the
Concept Model of Mobile GIS, Symposium on
Geospatial Theory, Processing and Applications,
ISPRS, Ottawa, Canada.
2.
Alivand, M., M.R. Malek and A. Alesheikh, 2007.
Distributed
Mobile GIS, Proc. of Map Asia
Conference, Malaysia.
3.
Wu, Q., 2006. Incremental Routing Algorithms for
Dynamic Transportation  Networks, M.Sc Thesis,
Calgary University, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
4.
Neumann, A., 2005. Navigation in Space, Time and
Topic, XXII International  Cartographic Conference,
A Coruna, Spain.
5.
Koncz, N. and T.M. Adams, 2001.Temporal Data
Constructs for Multidimensional Transportation GIS
Applications, Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of Wiscosin-Madison, USA.
6.
Chabini, I., 1998. Discrete Dynamic Shortest Path
Problems
in 
Transportation 
 
Applications,
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
MIT, USA.
7.
Ahmadi, S., H. Ebadi, M.J. Valadan Zeoj, 2008. A New
Method for Path Finding of  Power Transmission
Lines in Geospatial Information System Using Raster
Networks and Minimum of Mean Algorithm, World
Applied Sci. J., 3(2): 269-277.
Selection for Navigation, Proc. of COSIT, Australia.
9.
McHugh, J.A., 1990. Algorithmic Graph Theory,
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,  New Jersey 07632. 
10. Dean, B.R., 2004. Shortest Paths in FIFO Time-
Dependent Networks : Theory and Algorithms,
Technical
Report, 
Massachusetts 
Institute 
of
Technology, USA.
11. Gentile, G., K. Noekeland L. Meschini, 2006.Time and
Space Discretization in  Dynamic Traffic Assignment
Models, Department of Transportation, University of
Rome, Italy. 
12. Alivand, M., M.R. Malek and A. Alesheikh, 2007.
Distributed Mobile Sensors for generating Traffic
Information, Proc. of Location Asia Conference,
Hong Kong.
13. Azizi, A., 2003. Network Analysis for Urban Traffic in
GIS, M.Sc Thesis, Khajeh Nasir University, Tehran,
Iran.
14. Malek, M.R., M.R. Delavar and A.U. Frank, 2006. A
Logic-Based Foundation for Spatial Relationship in
Mobile
GIS 
Environment, 
Proc. 
of 
second
International symposium on LBS & Telecartography,
Vienna, Austria.
15. Malek, M.R., 2004. A Logic-based Framework for
Qualitative Spatial Reasoning  in Mobile GIS
Environment, Lecture Note in Artificial Intelligence,
3066:  418-426. 
16. Miller, H.J., 2005. Place-Based Versus People-Based
Accessibility. In: Levinson, D. and K.J. Krizek (Eds.)
Access to Destinations. Elsevier, London, pp: 63-89.
17. Amirian, P. and A. Alesheikh, 2008. A Service
Oriented Framework for  Disseminating Geospatial
Data to Mobile, Desktop and Web Clients. World
Applied Sci. J., 3(1): 140-153.
