--- 
source: Biological Conservation 2006 Soisalo.pdf
--- 

Estimating the density of a jaguar population in the Brazilian
Pantanal using camera-traps and capture–recapture
sampling in combination with GPS radio-telemetry
Marianne K. Soisaloa,*, Sandra M.C. Cavalcantib,c
aWildlife Research Group, Department of Anatomy, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3DY, UK
bDepartment of Forest, Range, and Wildlife Sciences, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-5230, USA
cInstituto Pro´-Carnivoros, Caixa Postal 10, Atibaia, SP, 12940-970, Brazil
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Received 23 June 2005
Received in revised form
16 November 2005
Accepted 21 November 2005
Available online 9 January 2006
Keywords:
Jaguar
Panthera onca
Camera-traps
Capture–recapture
Population density estimation
Effective sampled area
A B S T R A C T
The jaguar (Panthera onca) is the largest feline in the Americas and third largest world-
wide, smaller in size only to the tiger (P. tigris) and lion (P. leo). Yet, in comparison, rela-
tively few studies on jaguar population densities have been conducted and baseline data
for management purposes are needed. Camera trapping and capture–recapture sampling
methods were used to estimate the size of a jaguar population in the Pantanal’s open wet
grassland habitat, an important area for the long-term survival of the species. This study
is the ﬁrst jaguar population estimate conducted in co-operation with a GPS-telemetry
study providing an important opportunity for comparing different methods of density
estimation. An accessible area within a 460 km2 privately-owned ranch was sampled with
equal effort during the dry seasons of 2003 and 2004. Thirty-one and twenty-ﬁve individ-
ual jaguars were identiﬁed in 2003 and 2004, respectively. Estimates of jaguar abundance
were generated by program CAPTURE. Density estimates were produced according to dif-
ferent methods used to calculate the effectively sampled areas which ranged from 274 to
568 km2. For 2003, the currently-used mean maximum distance moved (MMDM) method
produced a density of 10.3 jaguars/100 km2, while GPS-telemetry-based calculations pro-
duced a mean density of 6.6 jaguars/100 km2. For 2004, the MMDM method produced an
estimate of 11.7 jaguars/100 km2 while GPS-telemetry calculations produced a density of
6.7 jaguars/100 km2. Our results suggest that the widely-used MMDM method used to cal-
culate effectively sampled areas is signiﬁcantly under-reﬂecting maximum distances
moved by jaguars and their range-use and, thereby, considerably inﬂating cat density
estimates. This overestimation could place a population in a difﬁcult situation by length-
ening the time taken to initiate protection measures because of underestimating the risk
to that population.
 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1.
Introduction
The jaguar is the largest cat in the Neotropics and third larg-
est world-wide. It is an important species within its ecosys-
tem,
occupying
the
position
of
top
predator
and
is
considered an umbrella species within a wide range of habi-
tats (Seymour, 1989). Culturally signiﬁcant throughout the
Americas, jaguars have long been revered as an important
0006-3207/$ - see front matter  2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2005.11.023
* Corresponding author: Tel.: +44 1223 333753/2073 723543; fax: +44 1223 333786.
E-mail addresses: mks23@cam.ac.uk, mariannesoisalo@hotmail.com (M.K. Soisalo), cavalcanti1@yahoo.com (S.M.C. Cavalcanti).
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6
available at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biocon


symbol of power and beauty (Saunders, 1998; Luna and Amar-
ingo, 1999), so that when considering conservation strategies,
the strong image of the jaguar, coupled with its ecological
importance, make it an ideal ﬂagship species to enlist both lo-
cal and global support for conservation.
Continual loss of habitat has reduced the jaguar’s histor-
ical range of occupation by more than 50% since 1900 (San-
derson
et
al.,
1999a,b)
and
many
jaguar
populations
currently coexist with humans and their activities. Large
areas continue to be converted for agriculture, cattle ranch-
ing and human settlement, bringing jaguars and humans
into direct conﬂict (Conforti and Azevedo, 2003; Polisar
et al., 2003). Livestock predation is the primary cause of peo-
ple’s intolerance of
these large cats (Sanderson
et al.,
1999a,b).
Information regarding the jaguar is still lacking, especially
in the ﬁeld of population ecology, which forms the basis for
any conservation management strategy. Many hunting and
natural history anecdotes exist (Siemel, 1953; de Almeida,
1990; Hoogesteijn and Mondolﬁ, 1992), but reliable data on
jaguar population densities are critically needed. Relatively
few such studies have been carried out to date (Schaller and
Crawshaw, 1980; Rabinowitz, 1986; Rabinowitz and Notting-
ham, 1986; Crawshaw and Quigley, 1991; Ceballos et al.,
2002; Nun˜ ez et al., 2002; Wallace et al., 2003; Maffei et al.,
2004; Silver et al., 2004) due to the difﬁculties of monitoring
a species of cryptic nature inhabiting extensive areas in difﬁ-
cult terrain.
The camera-trap capture–recapture method used in this
survey has proved to be an effective tool for estimating tiger
densities in Asia and has been recommended for use with
other individually identiﬁable animals (Karanth and Nichols,
1998, 2000, 2002; Carbone et al., 2001). Like tigers, jaguars
can be identiﬁed unambiguously by their distinctive coat
markings. Although extensively used to estimate tiger popu-
lations (Karanth, 1995; Karanth and Nichols, 1998, 2000;
Franklin et al., 1999; Smith et al., 1999; Karanth et al., 2001;
O’Brien et al., 2003; Kawanishi and Sunquist, 2004), the use
of camera-traps in combination with capture–recapture sam-
pling methods to estimate jaguar populations has only re-
cently been initiated in Latin America (Wallace et al., 2003;
Maffei et al., 2004; Silver et al., 2004; Soisalo, 2004).
This is both the ﬁrst study to estimate a jaguar population
in Brazil based on camera-traps and capture–recapture, and
to use camera-trap data in conjunction with radio-telemetry
data (Cavalcanti, unpublished data) on the same population.
Speciﬁc objectives of this study were: (1) to estimate the abun-
dance of jaguars at the study site, using a capture–recapture
sampling approach with the use of camera-traps, (2) to esti-
mate the effectively sampled area and use this information
to calculate the jaguar density expressed as the number of
jaguars/100 km2, (3) to compare the estimates of effectively
sampled areas based on camera-traps, with estimates of
effectively sampled areas based on an independent estimate
of home-range size and animal movement obtained from
radio-telemetry data, and use this comparison to provide
information for a future calibration of the mean maximum
distance moved (MMDM) method for large cats, and (4) to pro-
vide baseline data from which to begin a long-term popula-
tion monitoring programme.
2.
Methods
2.1.
Study area
This study was carried out in the Pantanal wetlands of Mato
Grosso do Sul, south-western Brazil. The area is the largest
natural ﬂoodplain in the world, covering over 140,000 km2
(Alho et al., 1988), and is characterised by low terrain with
an annual ﬂooding regime. Due to substantial jaguar popula-
tions, a stable prey base and adequate habitat, the Pantanal
has recently been considered an important area for the
long-term
conservation
of
jaguars
(Sanderson
et
al.,
1999a,b). Ranching activities within the Pantanal watershed
have a 250-year history. With about 4 million cattle, it is the
main economic activity in the region where most of the land
is privately-owned (Fortney, 2000).
The survey was conducted within Fazenda Sete (19570S,
56250W), a 460 km2 privately-owned beef cattle ranch. Alti-
tude ranges between 89 and 120 m above sea level. The cli-
mate is seasonal, with a rainy season between October and
March and an average monthly precipitation of 161.5 mm.
The dry season occurs between April and September with a
monthly precipitation of 49.3 mm (Crawshaw and Quigley,
1984). Temperatures range from 21.5 C in June and July to
43.5 C in October. Relative humidity varies from 60–75% in
the dry season to 80–95% in the wet season (Crawshaw and
Quigley, 1984).
The vegetation consists of marginally-ﬂooded semi-decid-
uous forest and other major habitat types in the area are
marsh, grassland, open forest or cerrado, forest patches and
riverine forest (Crawshaw and Quigley, 1991). A detailed
description of Pantanal vegetation has been published else-
where (Prance and Schaller, 1982).
White-lipped peccaries (Tayassu pecari), marsh deer (Blast-
ocerus dichotomus), caiman (Caiman crocodilus yacare), armadil-
los (Euphractus sexcinctus), and giant anteaters (Myrmecophaga
tridactyla) are found in the area and are considered important
prey species for jaguars (Schaller, 1983; Polisar et al., 2003;
Cavalcanti, unpublished data). Puma (Puma concolor), ocelot
(Felis pardalis), giant river otter (Pteronura brasiliensis), and
crab-eating foxes (Cerdocyon thous) are sympatric carnivores
that also inhabit the area (Schaller, 1983).
2.2.
Field methods
The sampling design and statistical framework used in this
study were based on tiger studies in India (Karanth, 1995; Kar-
anth and Nichols, 1998, 2000; Karanth et al., 2001) and recent
jaguar studies in Latin America (Wallace et al., 2003; Maffei
et al., 2004; Silver et al., 2004). A closed model capture–recap-
ture sampling approach (Otis et al., 1978; White et al., 1982)
was used to survey an area within the ranch using camera-
traps to obtain photographs of jaguars. This camera-trapping
survey was carried out simultaneously with a radio-telemetry
study (Cavalcanti, unpublished data).
2.2.1.
Camera-trap systems
Fifteen Trailmaster TM1550 active infra-red systems (Good-
son Associates Inc., KS, USA) and one Camtrakker passive
infra-red system (Cam Trak South Inc., GA, USA) were used.
488
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6


Each trap station was set with two cameras opposite each
other, positioned to photograph both asymmetrical ﬂanks
of the animal for positive identiﬁcation. The beam was set
at a height of about 45 cm and the two cameras were placed
on either side, 7–8 m apart facing the centre of the beam.
The systems were programmed to run for 24 h and to ﬁre
as soon as the beam was broken with a delay of 3 min be-
tween pictures. Stations were checked daily, or at least every
two days, due to heavy cattle trafﬁc. No bait or lure was used
at any station to attract jaguars.
2.2.2.
Radio telemetry
Eight jaguars were captured with the help of trained hound
dogs and an experienced local hunter (de Almeida, 1990) at
sites of frequent use. Treed cats were immobilised with Tela-
zol (tiletamine-zolazepan, Fort Dodge do Brasil), or a combi-
nation of Telazol and ketamine hydrochloride. Individuals
were ﬁtted with a Global Positioning System (GPS) telemetry
collar (Televilt, Sweden) and released. These GPS collars pro-
vided coverage over large areas and operated 24-h a day
throughout the year, collecting 12 locations/day for each
cat and storing them ‘‘on-board’’. We downloaded data from
the collars at 21-day intervals with the help of a Cessna air-
craft. This large amount of locations on an individual pro-
vided information on animal movement continuously and
the use of GPS collars allowed for the simultaneous location
of several individuals. All jaguar locations (n = 5.600) were
plotted on a base map of the study area (Landsat TM Satel-
lite Image).
2.3.
Sampling design considerations
One of the most important aspects of camera trapping is to
capture as many different individuals and to obtain as many
photo recaptures of each individual as possible (Karanth and
Nichols, 2000, 2002). Thus, it is critical to optimise trap place-
ment to maximise the chances of capturing a jaguar. As this
study is the ﬁrst to estimate a jaguar population using the
camera-trapping method in combination with GPS radio-
telemetry data collected at the same study site, the study de-
sign was adapted accordingly to include the radio-telemetry
movement data during the calculations and general planning
of the survey.
Like tigers, jaguars use regular travel routes. Information
on previous use was derived from both direct sign (tracks,
scats, scrapes, kill sites and sightings) and the telemetry data-
set from GPS collars collected at the site (Cavalcanti, unpub-
lished data). Since all jaguar locations were plotted on a
map of the study area, optimal sites for trap placement were
selected based on these jaguar locations. Areas with clusters
of locations, which indicated quite heavy use of a particular
site, usually by more than one individual, were selected for
the placement of camera-traps (Fig. 1). In this manner, trap
placement was greatly optimised to photograph as many
individuals as possible over the largest accessible area.
The size of the area to be sampled was driven by the num-
ber of camera-traps available (n = 16), and accessibility within
the area. As the study site was located in the Pantanal wet-
lands, many areas remained too wet and inaccessible, even
Fig. 1 – Choice of camera-trap locations based on GPS-locations of collared cats. Areas within circles indicated use of that area
by more than one individual cat and were therefore thought to be good sites for camera-trap placement.
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6
489


in the dry period, and a thorough preliminary reconnaissance
deﬁned the outer boundaries of the sampling area each year.
An additional consideration in determining the size of the
sampling area was the average size of an adult female’s home
range (Karanth and Nichols, 2002). Since an adult female jag-
uar has the smallest range within a population (Crawshaw
and Quigley, 1984, 1991; Rabinowitz and Nottingham, 1986;
Cavalcanti, unpublished data), the placement of a minimum
of 2–3 traps as recommended by Karanth and Nichols (2002)
within such an area, ensures that animals of other sex and
age classes are also likely to be exposed to more traps.
A mean of four female home ranges during the same period
in which the sampling was conducted, the dry period (June–
October), was calculated at 40 km2 (ranging from 33.9 to
50 km2). This a priori knowledge of a female home range size
was then used to determine trap spacing. It is crucial for the
design that the area be evenly covered with traps to minimise
the chance that an individual cat could be living in the area
and have a zero chance of being captured by at least one cam-
era-trap during the sampling period. No gaps larger than
40 km2 were left within the area and the areas surveyed both
years contained no holes of unsuitable jaguar habitat.
In the 2003 survey, three similarly-sized contiguous blocks
(mean = 65 km2) were sampled sequentially using 16 stations
in each block for the same amount of time (n = 20 days). The
capture history data of the ﬁrst sampling day, in each of three
blocks were combined to form one sampling occasion. The
same procedure was used for the second, third, fourth, and
remaining days within the 20-day sampling period. In 2004,
accessibility in the area was reduced by water levels, and
thus, the design was different. The 16 camera-traps covered
the accessible area but remained stationary during the 60-
day period. It is important that equal effort is invested into
each sampling period as was done and that this period is
short enough in order to meet the general assumption of a
closed population in mark-recapture studies (Karanth and
Nichols, 2002). As the life span of jaguars is similar to that
of tigers (Hoogesteijn and Mondolﬁ, 1992; Sunquist and Sun-
quist, 2002), we assumed that the use of a short sampling per-
iod of 20 sampling occasions over a two-month period in this
study would allow us to consider demographic closure.
2.4.
Analysis
To minimise bias in the identiﬁcation process, all jaguar pho-
tographs were examined by the authors independently. Each
photograph of an individual represented a capture occasion.
Capture histories were then compiled into a matrix for use
in program CAPTURE (Otis et al., 1978; White et al., 1982; Rexs-
tad and Burnham, 1991). For the 2003 survey in which the area
was divided into blocks, we followed Karanth and Nichols
(2002) so that the three blocks were combined to form one ﬁ-
nal matrix, with all animals captured during the survey mak-
ing up the rows, and the combined 20 sampling occasions
making up the columns. The sampling occasions of the three
blocks were combined so that the ﬁrst day in all blocks
formed occasion number one, the second day in all blocks
combined formed the second occasion and so on. Program
CAPTURE computed an estimate of population size or abun-
dance (N) and var (N) for jaguars within the effectively sam-
pled area A(W). The abundance estimate was then used to
derive an estimate of jaguar density, deﬁned as D = N/A,
where N is animal abundance and A is the area sampled.
The area used in this calculation is not simply the area de-
ﬁned by the outer trap polygon. Typically, a buffer or a bound-
ary strip of width W is added to the area deﬁned by the outer
traps, so that the sampling area also includes areas covered
by the outer traps beyond the outer polygon limits (Otis
et al., 1978; White et al., 1982; Karanth and Nichols, 1998,
2002). An overestimate would occur if the outer trap polygon
area alone was used.
Karanth and Nichols (1998, 2002) used and recommended
the approach formulated and tested by Wilson and Anderson
(1985) to estimate the buffer width of their tiger camera-trap-
ping surveys. This method has also been used in other jaguar
camera-trap capture–recapture surveys carried out (Wallace
et al., 2003; Maffei et al., 2004; Silver et al., 2004). When home
range information is not available, once the trapping is con-
cluded, the ‘‘mean maximum distance moved’’ (MMDM) by
all those cats that were trapped more than once is used to com-
pute a boundary or buffer strip. Each cat’s maximum linear dis-
tance moved from one trap to another during the sampling
period is recorded and an average of all the cats’ maximum dis-
tances is calculated to reﬂect an estimate of home-range diam-
eter. This ﬁgure is then halved to produce an estimation of the
average radius of a mean home range which is then added onto
the outer trap polygon as a buffer width. This new area, the
effectively sampled area, is ﬁnally used to calculate the density
of jaguars in the area, expressed as the number of jaguars/
100 km2. Therefore, a critical factor that ultimately inﬂuences
density estimates is the buffer width.
This study provided an unique opportunity to examine
how different methods to compute a boundary strip width af-
fect jaguar density estimates. In this paper, we present esti-
mates of jaguar density at the study site based on (1) the
currently-used MMDM method from camera-trapping photo-
graphic captures alone (half of the mean maximum moved
distances), (2) the MMDM method from camera-traps alone
where the mean maximum distances moved by jaguars were
used without being halved (full MMDM) (Parmenter et al.,
2003), (3) the ‘‘actual MMDM’’ calculated from the collared
cats’ maximum moved distances (n = 6, 2003 only), and (4) a
buffer width calculated using male and female home range
sizes derived from the GPS radio-telemetry data.
With the radio-telemetry data, a minimum convex poly-
gon method with 95% of location data for each individual
cat was used (Home Range extension for ArcViewTM). Loca-
tions for ﬁve males and two females during the same period
of the survey (the dry period, from June through October)
were used to calculate a mean jaguar home range of
83.45 km2 (52–176 km2). We used this area to calculate the
buffer width applying A = pr2, where A is the estimated area
of the mean jaguar home range and r is the buffer width
(5.1 km). Although we used information from only 7 individ-
ual cats in order to calculate a mean jaguar home range, we
are conﬁdent this is an accurate representation of jaguar
ranges in our study area. The radio-telemetry system we used
in this study, based on GPS positions, not only allowed for
accurate locations of study animals, but provided coverage
over large areas, 24-h a day throughout the year, independent
490
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6


of terrain and weather conditions. This large amount of less
biased radio locations, i.e., independent of whether the re-
searcher can reach study animals, allows for an estimation
of home ranges that is generally more accurate than an esti-
mation based on traditional telemetry methods.
Only during the 2003 survey were there cats ﬁtted with
GPS-telemetry collars, when ‘‘actual MMDM’’ comparisons
were conducted. This comparison was carried out only during
2003 as it served to show the same cats had, during the sur-
vey, moved much longer distances than reﬂected by the cam-
era-traps. The ‘‘actual MMDM’’ (or the distance moved by
collared cats) produced a buffer which was almost identical
to the one calculated from the home range estimated for jag-
uars at the study site and therefore served to conﬁrm that the
‘‘actual’’ maximum distances moved by cats can be used as a
proxy for jaguar home ranges. On the other hand, the mean
maximum distances moved by animals as reﬂected by the
cameras alone (not ‘‘actual’’) were shown not to be reliable
as a reﬂection of home range diameter (or of ‘‘actual’’
MMDMs). The problem lies with the MMDM from camera-
traps being used to calculate a buffer width, according to
the currently-used method based on Wilson and Anderson
(1985). In 2004, we did not use information from GPS-collared
cats, but the home range and consequently optimal buffer
width had already been established at 5.1 km from thousands
of locations (n = 5.600) in 2003. This buffer width estimated
from telemetry can be used in future surveys in this area.
Once a home range estimate and its related buffer width
had been calculated it did not need to be re-calculated in
2004.
3.
Results
The sampling effort of 960 camera-trap-nights (16 traps · 20
days · 3 blocks in 2003 and 16 traps · 60 days in 2004) ex-
pended over 20 sampling occasions, resulted in a total of 31
individual jaguars being positively identiﬁed in 157 photo cap-
tures in 2003, and 25 individual jaguars in 131 photo captures
in 2004 (Table 1). No cubs were photographed in 2003 whilst a
mother and cub were photographed in the 2004 survey. Cap-
ture frequencies ranged from 1 to 22 captures for an individ-
ual cat, with a mean of 5.2 captures/individual jaguar.
In the ﬁrst survey of 2003, model Mb, which allows differ-
ences in capture probabilities between newly-caught individ-
uals and animals that were already captured, was selected by
CAPTURE as best-ﬁtting for these data. The suggested estima-
tor was Zippin, the estimator for Mb. Parameters estimated in
this study were population size ð^NÞ, estimated at 37 jaguars
ðS^E ^N5:52Þ, probability of capture of an unmarked animal on
any trapping occasion, ^p ¼ 0:087, and the recapture probabil-
ity of any animal captured at least once, ^c ¼ 0:167. The statis-
tical
test
for
population
closure
in
program
CAPTURE
indicated lack of closure (z = 2.647, P = 0.004). The best-
ﬁtting model for the second survey of 2004 was model Mh,
where capture probabilities are heterogeneous for each indi-
vidual, but are not affected by trap response or time, and
the population was estimated at 32 jaguars ðS^E ^N5:35Þ. Pro-
gram
CAPTURE
indicated
population
closure
(z = 0.225,
P = 0.589). The areas encompassed by the outer traps were
calculated at 165 km2 (2003) and 110 km2 (2004). To these
areas, we added a buffer width using the described ways to
calculate it and the resulting effectively sampled areas and
densities are summarised in Table 2.
For cats with at least 3 captures, camera-trap data pro-
vided information on their minimum home ranges. For male
and female jaguars, home-range sizes obtained from the
camera-trapping data reﬂected only a small fraction (8.1%
and 9.3%, respectively) of the area used by the same collared
individuals. For 11 males captured, minimum ranges reﬂected
by the traps ranged from 2.0 to 28.4 km2, with a mean of
9.5 km2, whilst the minimum range obtained from the telem-
etry (n = 4) ranged from 65.1 to 176 km2, with a mean of
116.5 km2. The female minimum ranges obtained from the
camera-trap data (n = 4) ranged from 0.5 to 17.6 km2 with a
mean of 5.6 km2, whilst the minimum ranges obtained from
the telemetry ranged from 52 to 65.1 km2 (n = 2).
4.
Discussion
We successfully tested the suitability of camera-trap capture–
recapture sampling methods combined with telemetry tech-
nology for monitoring the status of jaguars in an open wet
grassland habitat of the Pantanal, a high-conﬂict landscape
considered important for the long-term survival of the spe-
cies. Although camera-trapping was an expensive method,
where only a small proportion of pictures taken provided
information on jaguars, it was a quick and efﬁcient tool to ob-
tain an estimate of the jaguar population at the study site.
There are still certain limitations and possible biases related
to the method, however, which have been discussed else-
where (Karanth and Nichols, 2002; Soisalo, 2004).
4.1.
Population closure
A possible limitation of the method as used here to estimate
cat densities is the assumption of population closure. A
Table 1 – Results of camera-trap surveys conducted at Fazenda Sete, Pantanal, during dry seasons of 2003 and 2004
Survey
year
Number of
individual jaguars
Male
Female
Unknown
Sex ratio, M:F
CAPTURE
abundancec
SE
95% Conﬁdence
interval
2003a
31
15
10
6
1.5:1
37
±5.52
33–59
2004b
25
12
10
3
1.2:1
32
±5.35
27–51
a Program CAPTURE indicated model Mb as best-ﬁtting for these data.
b Program CAPTURE indicated model Mh as best-ﬁtting for these data.
c Absolute number of individuals as computed by program CAPTURE.
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6
491


critical assumption of closed models is that the animals are
not moving in or out of the area and there are no births or
deaths, i.e., the population remains constant in size and com-
position throughout the period of investigation (White et al.,
1982). It is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to ascertain closure of
a biological population, especially in a non-controlled situa-
tion, as even within a short one-hour sampling period for
example, a death or immigration, could in reality occur. It
has been veriﬁed in controlled situations that closure can be
shown to be violated even when it is known not to have been,
and vice-versa (White et al., 1982). Even when a population is
in fact closed the test might be reacting to the behavioural
change in capture probabilities which might seem like
recruitment, for example (White et al., 1982). The CAPTURE
test in this study indicated lack of closure in 2003, probably
because sometimes this result in the test can represent cer-
tain patterns of variation in capture probability that mimic
lack of closure; in this case it may have been the number of
animals caught only once (n = 9). When model Mb is selected,
as was in 2003, the test for closure in program CAPTURE is un-
able to distinguish failure of closure from any behavioural
change in capture probabilities. Closure can only be tested
when it is assumed that the underlying model is Mo or Mh.
(Otis et al., 1978; White et al., 1982). As these closure tests
are poor, we, as researchers, must do what we can to ensure
that the assumption of closure is met. The best one can do is
to conduct the sampling in a short period relating to the life
history of the study animal, as was done in our study and pre-
viously described in Section 2.
4.2.
Model selection
For the 2003 survey, model Mb, an estimator which assumes
that capture probabilities vary by behavioural response to
capture, was identiﬁed as the most appropriate model; the
CAPTURE test suggested there may have been a behavioural
response in the jaguars. It is assumed in this model that cap-
ture probability differs for animals that have, or have not,
been caught previously. The results of this test indicated that
the cats had a 9% chance of being caught the ﬁrst time, but
this probability increased to 17% for recaptures. At ﬁrst, this
might seem that the jaguars could have become ‘‘trap-hap-
py’’, a term used to indicate that the likelihood of a cat return-
ing to a particular trap is increased (White et al., 1982). This is
the case when there is a positive response to trapping result-
ing from a favourable ﬁrst-capture experience, for example
when using bait or lure. In this study, we believe these ani-
mals were not ‘‘trap-happy’’, as there were no rewards (no bait
or lure was used) on returning to a trap. Instead, these results
appear to reﬂect our choices of trap locations made by incor-
porating the telemetry dataset available (Cavalcanti, unpub-
lished data), and not having to rely solely on sign. There
was a better chance of capturing the animals, not because
of a behavioural change where they returned to the trap more
often, but because we succeeded in placing the traps in sev-
eral spots shown to be regularly used by cats. This increased
the probability of recapturing individual jaguars as they re-
turned to use their habitual trails or roads. This high recap-
ture rate suggests that we must have identiﬁed several
established travel routes within the study site.
In 2004, as in most jaguar (Wallace et al., 2003; Maffei et al.,
2004; Silver et al., 2004) and tiger camera-trapping surveys
(Karanth and Nichols, 1998, 2000; Karanth et al., 2001; Kaw-
anishi, 2002; Kawanishi and Sunquist, 2004), the model cho-
sen
as
best-ﬁtting
was
model
Mh.
This
model
allows
variation in capture probability among individuals, but the
probability of each individual being recaptured remains the
same throughout the sampling period. This difference in
the choice of best-ﬁtting models by program CAPTURE for
the same population may have been a reﬂection of the differ-
ent sampling designs used in 2003 and 2004. Although in our
study both models produced the same density estimates, fu-
ture studies should consider differences in sampling design
and how they inﬂuence model selection.
4.3.
Combining two techniques to estimate population size
In tiger (Karanth, 1995; Karanth and Nichols, 1998, 2000; Kar-
anth et al., 2001, 2004) and other jaguar (Wallace et al., 2003;
Maffei et al., 2004; Silver et al., 2004) camera-trapping surveys,
Table 2 – Effectively sampled areas calculated from camera-trap and GPS-telemetry data and their resulting jaguar density
estimates
Survey
year
Sampled area size (km2) –
outer trap polygon
Method used for buffer
width calculation
Buffer width
(km)
Effective sampled
area (km2)
Resulting density
estimate (jaguars/100 km2)
2003
165
Camera-traps
MMDM
3.0
360
10.3 ± 1.53
Full MMDM
6.0
653
5.7 ± 0.84
GPS telemetry
Actual MMDM
5.2
568
6.5 ± 0.97
Home range
5.1
557
6.6 ± 0.99
2004
110
Camera-traps
MMDM
2.9
274
11.7 ± 1.94
Full MMDM
5.8
554
5.8 ± 0.97
GPS telemetry
Home range
5.1
476
6.7 ± 1.13
492
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6


trap locations were based solely on evidence of sign (tracks,
scrapes or past sightings) and/or trails in the forest thought
by local people to be used by cats. Karanth and Nichols
(2000) point out how a ‘‘better choice of sites would yield higher
capture probabilities. A higher proportion of the animals in the area
may then be caught, and the resulting estimates of population size
derived would be statistically more precise.’’ Since this design is
the ﬁrst to use GPS-based telemetry to enhance the choice
of optimal sites for camera-trap placement and, conse-
quently, increase capture probabilities, it may be fair to as-
sume that a high proportion of the jaguar population in the
area was probably captured. If we apply mark-recapture con-
cepts to the radio-collared cat population at the ranch in 2003,
out of a total known population of six collared cats, all six
(100%) were captured by the camera-traps. If we look at the
abundances estimated by program CAPTURE for both years
(37 in 2003 and 32 in 2004, Table 1) our cameras photographed
a high proportion (84% and 78%, respectively) of the popula-
tion. Karanth and Nichols (2002) used an index of tiger density
based on a trapping rate as the mean number of tiger pictures
per 100 trap nights. Our surveys produced a high mean index
of 15.1 jaguars/100 trap nights. These results support the
argument that we had a very high encounter rate and are
likely to have captured a high proportion of the population.
Therefore the combination of the two techniques used, which
optimised trap site selection, may have produced a more
accurate representation of the true jaguar population at the
study site.
Amongst the jaguar population studies using camera-trap
surveys in Central and South America (Wallace et al., 2003;
Maffei et al., 2004; Silver et al., 2004), the highest number of
jaguars photographed at any one site was in this study
(n = 31 in 2003 and n = 25 in 2004). In addition to lacking com-
plementary information from radio-telemetry, these other
surveys took place in forested areas with no cattle presence.
The number of animals captured ranged from 7 to 11 individ-
uals in areas ranging from 117 to 458 km2. This disparity in
numbers of animals photographed may be due not only to
the different methods used, but also to several factors, such
as differences in habitat, prey availability, and cattle density.
In the Pantanal, domestic cattle are abundant, readily-avail-
able prey items that comprise an important part of the jag-
uar’s diet (de Almeida, 1990; Schaller, 1983; Hoogesteijn and
Mondolﬁ, 1992; Quigley and Crawshaw, 1992; Cavalcanti,
unpublished data). In addition, the availability of native prey
in the Pantanal is also higher than in forested areas (Hoo-
gesteijn and Mondolﬁ, 1992). With a higher density of prey,
both wild and domestic, a higher density of predators in the
area is not surprising.
The combination of techniques used in this study provided
a sound basis for analysing how sample area size calculations
can affect density estimates. Density calculations are driven
by two components: the abundance estimate and the size of
the sampled area. A crucial factor during camera-trapping
capture–recapture surveys, therefore, is the buffer calculation
used to produce the ‘‘effectively sampled area’’. It ultimately
inﬂuences ﬁnal density estimates. As tiger and jaguar cam-
era-trapping surveys mentioned herein have been using the
previously-described MMDM method for this calculation, this
was a good opportunity to examine how the density estimate
obtained using this method compared to that obtained using
GPS-telemetry data to compute a boundary strip.
4.4.
Density estimates derived from MMDM method and
GPS-telemetry compared
The incorporation of thousands of GPS radio-telemetry loca-
tions to compute a buffer width, produced considerably larger
effectively sampled areas (Fig. 2) and, consequently, lower
density estimates when compared to smaller areas and higher
densities derived from the MMDM method as used in other
large cat studies (Karanth and Nichols, 1998, 2000; Karanth
et al., 2001, 2004; Wallace et al., 2003; Maffei et al., 2004; Silver
et al., 2004). These results suggest that the MMDM method
consistently overestimated the density of jaguars at the site
over two yearly surveys (Table 2), suggesting that other stud-
ies using this method might also be overestimating large-cat
densities. This difference in our study is expressed as a ratio
of 1.56 (2003) and 1.74 (2004) between the estimates based on
MMDM calculations from camera-traps alone and telemetry-
based calculations. If the density at this site were reported
using the same methods used elsewhere (Karanth and Nic-
hols, 1998, 2000; Karanth et al., 2001, 2004; Wallace et al.,
2003; Maffei et al., 2004; Silver et al., 2004), the resulting den-
sities of 10.3–11.7 jaguars/100 km2, based on radio-telemetry
comparisons, might be overestimating the population by as
much as 74%. We believe this to be a worryingly-high level
of error when it comes to making management decisions
based on population estimates.
N
10 km 
Fig. 2 – Survey map showing camera-trap locations for 2003
and 2004, outer trap polygon and the effectively sampled
area sizes (2003) calculated using two different methods to
calculate a buffer width. •, Camera-trap stations 2003;
,
camera-trap stations 2004; –•–, outer traps polygon
(area = 165 km2);
, effectively sampled area with buffer
calculated from jaguars’ MMDM, or camera-trap information
alone (area = 360 km2);
, effectively sampled area with
buffer calculated from GPS-telemetry, or the jaguars’
‘‘actual’’ MMDM (area = 568 km2). Home range calculations
from telemetry produced a very similar resulting area of
557 km2.
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6
493


Camera-trapping renders a biased representation of the
movement of the animals, while the information from GPS
radio-telemetry is a more accurate representation of their
movements and, consequently, of the size of the effectively
sampled area, crucial in calculating the ﬁnal density. Our
radio-telemetry data showed that the animals had, in fact,
moved linear distances, which were almost twice as long
as the distances reﬂected by the maximum distances shown
by traps, illustrating the fact that the effectively sampled
area, and the manner in which it is being calculated, is prob-
lematic. The ‘‘actual MMDM’’ from telemetry provided an al-
most identical estimate to the actual home range sizes (6.5
and 6.6 jaguars/100 km2 in 2003 and 2004) but the estimates
using camera-trap MMDM alone were not similar (10.3 jag-
uars and 11.7 jaguars/100 km2, respectively), and might in-
ﬂate
animal
densities
when
used
to
calculate
the
effectively sampled area (Table 2). Although tiger and jaguar
surveys herein mentioned have been using the MMDM meth-
od as described, Parmenter et al. (2003) used another version
which includes the full MMDM values in the buffer calcula-
tion. When the mean maximum distances moved by all
animals was not halved and a ‘‘full MMDM’’ value was used
to calculate a buffer for our surveys, it produced a slightly
lower (5.7 and 5.8 jaguars/100 km2, in 2003 and 2004) but
much closer density estimate to that calculated using telem-
etry (Table 2).
Minimum home ranges obtained from camera-trapping
during a short sampling period were found to be highly
unrepresentative of true home ranges. Areas used by jaguars,
as reﬂected by the camera-traps, represented only 8–9% of the
true ranges as shown by the GPS-telemetry. We recommend
that data from camera-trapping surveys alone should not be
used to estimate large cat home ranges.
From our ﬁve-year experience conducting research at the
study site and this new body of information, we suggest that
the density estimates of 6.5–6.7 jaguars/100 km2 are more bio-
logically accurate than the estimates of 10.3–11.7 jaguars/
100 km2 obtained from camera-trap MMDM calculations (see
Table 2). This discrepancy becomes of great relevance within
a conservation management framework. To illustrate this,
we extrapolated these numbers to different-sized areas. If,
for example, within an area of 100 km2, we overestimate a
jaguar population by 3.8–5 individuals (2003–2004 results), in
an area the size of the Pantanal (140,000 km2), we would be
overestimating
the
population
by
5.320–7.000
individual
jaguars.
Any extrapolation of these density results outside the
study area boundaries would be unwise as there are differ-
ences in vegetation cover, land-use and hunting levels outside
the ranch and throughout the Pantanal, and was only used
here to illustrate the problem. An extrapolation at this stage
could give an incorrect idea about numbers of jaguars
throughout the area. Additional surveys should be conducted
at different sites in the region to begin to understand jaguar
distribution on a larger-scale in the Pantanal.
Karanth et al. (2004) believe ‘‘that given the large number of
camera-trap surveys now being conducted across the world. . .there
is room for improvement in the survey design and analytical proto-
cols used in many cases’’. Although we agree this method is cur-
rently
the
most
successful
available
tool
to
survey
individually identiﬁable big cats systematically, a serious
problem has been brought to light, relating to the conversion
of an abundance estimate into a density estimate. The combi-
nation of these two powerful techniques has shown that we
need to reconsider how we calculate effectively sampled
areas for jaguars. The original model used for small mammals
to formulate the calculation in this method (Wilson and
Anderson, 1985) might work well with smaller mammals
but it does not seem to hold when it comes to applying these
notions to far-ranging large cats such as jaguars.
We urge researchers to exercise the utmost caution when
reporting densities using the MMDM method for calculations
to derive the size of an effectively sampled area. We suggest
existing studies of the same species and their known home
ranges might be useful additional references when deciding
the size of the buffer width, rather than using the MMDM
from camera-traps alone. However, only studies conducted
in the same type of habitat should be considered. Parmenter
et al. (2003) compared estimates of boundary strips based
on different methods and found that the use of the full
MMDM to calculate effective trapping area provided the most
accurate density estimate. In our study, although the full
MMDM did not produce an identical result to that obtained
from telemetry, and in comparison underestimated the popu-
lation by 14%, this would have been a much safer estimate
than the MMDM method (one-half the maximum distances
moved) which produced overestimates of up to 74%. We be-
lieve this question should continue to be addressed and fur-
ther studies of this kind should be able to produce a
calibration function, which can be recommended for future
camera-trapping
capture–recapture
population
estimate
calculations.
An important benchmark has been established from
which to begin a long-term monitoring programme of a jag-
uar population. The study was conducted at a privately-
owned cattle ranch and the results presented in this paper
highlight the importance of this particular site for conserva-
tion. As more than 95% of the Pantanal is privately-owned
(Quigley and Crawshaw, 1992; Swarts, 2000), jaguar conserva-
tion programmes will need to work closely with landowners
who will be sympathetic to the plight of the jaguar on their
land if this cat is to survive in this wetland habitat, one of
its last strongholds.
Acknowledgements
Camera-trapping was funded by A. Zarzur, J. Poyry, H. Ehrnro-
oth, N. Kuzbari, B.D.Turner and M. Soisalo. British Airways
Assisting Conservation, the British Ecological Society, Fujiﬁlm
UK and the Specialist – SP, also contributed towards the pro-
ject. Radio-telemetry was funded by Utah State University,
Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), Sociedade Civil Mami-
raua´ (SCM), National Scientiﬁc and Technological Develop-
ment – Brazil (CNPq), and Conservation, Food and Health
Foundation. We thank Mr. and Mrs. Israel Klabin for their
enthusiastic support of our work and permission to conduct
this research on their land. We are immensely grateful to K.
Ullas Karanth who, at the conception stages of the study,
was of great assistance in explaining his pioneering method
and suggesting alternative sampling designs. In the ﬁeld we
494
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6


thank E. Vilalba, M. Bassani, F. Cavalcanti, T. Micheletti, M.
Perilli, S. Romeiro, J. da Silva and T. Lee for their invaluable
assistance. The Centro de Conservac¸a˜o do Pantanal Research
Centre run by Fundac¸a˜o Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento
Sustenta´vel, WCS and SCM provided a base from where these
studies were conducted. We thank D.J. Chivers, E. Gese, A.
Noss and C. Thompson for their constructive comments on
the draft. M. Conner provided insight into model selection
within program CAPTURE. Permission to conduct animal pro-
cedures was granted by the Brazilian government through the
Brazilian Institute of Environment and Natural Renewable Re-
sources (IBAMA).
R E F E R E N C E S
Alho, C.J., Lacher, T.E., Gonc¸alves, H.C., 1988. Environmental
degradation in the Pantanal ecosystem. Bioscience 38,
164–171.
de Almeida, A., 1990. Jaguar Hunting in the Mato Grosso and
Bolivia. Safari Press, CA, USA.
Carbone, C., Christie, S., Conforti, K., Coulson, T., Franklin, N.,
Ginsberg, J.R., Grifﬁths, M., Holden, J., Kawanishi, K., Kinnaird,
M., Laidlaw, R., Lynam, A., Macdonald, D.W., Martyr, D.,
McDougal, C., Nath, L., O’Brien, T., Seidensticker, J., Smith,
D.J.L., Sunquist, M., Tilson, R., Wan Shahruddin, W.N., 2001.
The use of photographic rates to estimate densities of tigers
and other cryptic mammals. Anim. Conserv. 4, 75–79.
Ceballos, G., Chavez, C., Rivera, A., Manterola, C., Wall, B., 2002.
Taman˜ o poblacional y conservacio´n del jaguar en la reserva de
la biosefera Calakmul, Campeche, Me´xico. In: El Jaguar en el
nuevo milenio. Ediciones Cientı´ﬁcas Universita´rias,
Universidad Nacional Auto´noma de Me´xico/Wildlife
Conservation Society, New York, pp. 403–417.
Conforti, V.A., de Azevedo, F.C.C., 2003. Local perceptions of
jaguars (Panthera onca) and pumas (Puma concolor) in the Iguac¸u
National Park area, South Brazil. Biol. Conserv. 111, 215–221.
Crawshaw, P.G., Quigley, H.B., 1984. A ecologia do jaguar ou onc¸a
pintada no Pantanal. Relato´rio entregue ao Instituto Brasileiro
de Desenvolvimento Florestal (IBDF)/DN (Brasilia), p. 110.
Crawshaw, P.G., Quigley, H.B., 1991. Jaguar spacing, activity and
habitat use in a seasonally ﬂooded environment in Brazil. J.
Zool. Lond. 223, 357–370.
Hoogesteijn, R., Mondolﬁ, E., 1992. The Jaguar. Armitano
Publishers, Venezuela.
Fortney, R.H., 2000. Cattle Grazing and Sustainable Plant Diversity
in the Pantanal: What Do We Know? What Do We Need to
Know? The Pantanal of Brazil, Bolivia and Paraguay. Hudson
Mac Arthur Publishers.
Franklin, N., Bastoni, S., Siswomartono, D., Manansang, J., Tilson,
R., 1999. Last of the Indonesian tigers: a cause for optimism.
In: Seidensticker, J., Christie, S., Jackson, P. (Eds.), Riding the
Tiger: Tiger Conservation in Human-dominated Landscapes.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 130–147.
Karanth, K.U., 1995. Estimating tiger Panthera tigris populations
from camera-trap data using capture–recapture models. Biol.
Conserv. 71, 333–338.
Karanth, K.U., Nichols, J.D., 1998. Estimation of tiger densities in
India using photographic captures and recaptures. Ecology 79
(8), 2852–2862.
Karanth, K.U., Nichols, J.D., 2000. Ecological Status and
Conservation of Tigers in India. Final Technical Report to the
Division of International Conservation, US Fish and Wildlife
Service, Washington DC and Wildlife Conservation Society,
New York. Centre for Wildlife Studies, Bangalore, India.
Karanth, K.U., Nichols, J.D., 2002. Monitoring Tigers and Their
Prey: A Manual for Researchers, Managers and
Conservationists in Tropical Asia. Centre for Wildlife Studies,
Bangalore.
Karanth, K.U., Bhargav, P., Kumar, S., 2001. Karnataka Tiger
conservation Project. Final Report to Save the Tiger Fund –
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, Exxon Mobil
Corporation and other donors. Wildlife Conservation Society,
International Programs, Bronx, NY 10460-1099.
Karanth, K.U., Chundawat, R.S., Nichols, J.D., Kumar, N.S., 2004.
Estimation of tiger densities in the tropical dry forests of
Panna, Central India, using photographic capture–recapture
sampling. Anim. Conserv. 7, 285–290.
Kawanishi, K., 2002. Population status of tigers (Panthera tigris) in a
primary rainforest of Peninsular Malaysia. Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Florida, Gainsville.
Kawanishi, K., Sunquist, M.E., 2004. Conservation status of tigers
in a primary rainforest of Peninsular Malaysia. Biol. Conserv.
120, 329–344.
Luna, L.E., Amaringo, P., 1999. Ayahuasca Visions: The Religious
Iconography of a Peruvian Shaman. North Atlantic Books,
USA.
Maffei, L., Cuellar, E., Noss, A.J., 2004. One thousand jaguars
(Panthera onca) in Bolivia’s Chaco? Camera-trapping in the
Kaa-Iya National Park. J. Zool. 262 (3), 295–304.
Nun˜ ez, R., Miller, B., Lindzey, F., 2002. Ecologı´a del jaguar en la
reserva de la biosfera Chamela-Cuixmala, Jalisco, Me´xico. In:
El Jaguar en el nuevo milenio. Ediciones Cientı´ﬁcas
Universita´rias, Universidad Nacional Auto´noma de Me´xico/
Wildlife Conservation Society, New York, pp. 107–126.
O’Brien, T.G., Kinnaird, M.F., Wibisono, H.T., 2003. Crouching
tigers, hidden prey: Sumatran tiger and prey populations in a
tropical forest landscape. Anim. Conserv. 6, 131–139.
Otis, D.L., Burnham, K.P., White, G.C., Anderson, D.R., 1978.
Statistical inference from the capture data on closed animal
populations. Wildlife Monogr. 62, 1–135.
Parmenter, R.R., Yates, T.L., Anderson, D.R., Burnham, K.P.,
Dunnun, J.L., Franklin, A.B., Friggens, M.T., Lubow, B.C., Miller,
M., Olson, G.S., Parmenter, C.A., Pollard, J., Rextad, E., Shenk,
T.M., Stanley, T.R., White, G.C., 2003. Small-mammal density
estimation: a ﬁeld comparison of grid-based vs. web-based
density estimators. Ecol. Monogr. 73, 1–26.
Polisar, J., Maxit, I., Scognamillo, D., Farrell, L., Sunquist, M.E.,
Eisenberg, J.F., 2003. Jaguars, pumas, their prey base, and cattle
ranching: ecological interpretations of a management
problem. Biol. Conserv. 109, 297–310.
Prance, G.T., Schaller, G.B., 1982. Preliminary study of some
vegetation types of the Pantanal, Mato Grosso, Brazil. Brittonia
34, 228–251.
Quigley, H.B., Crawshaw, P.G., 1992. A conservation plan for the
jaguar Panthera onca in the Pantanal region of Brazil. Biol.
Conserv. 61, 149–157.
Rabinowitz, A.R., 1986. Jaguar predation on domestic livestock in
Belize. Wildlife Soc. Bull. 14, 170–174.
Rabinowitz, A., Nottingham, B., 1986. Ecology and behaviour of
the jaguar (Panthera onca) in Belize, Central America. J. Zool.
Lond. (A) 210, 149–159.
Rexstad, E., Burnham, K.P., 1991. User’s Guide for Interactive
Program CAPTURE Abundance Estimation of Closed
Population Animal Populations. Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO, USA.
Sanderson, E.W., Chetkiewicz, C.-L.B., Rabinowitz, A., Redford,
K.H., Robinson, J.G., Taber, A.B., 1999a. Un ana´lisis geogra´ﬁco
del estado de conservacio´n y distribuicio´n de los jaguares a
trave´s de su a´rea de distribuicio´n. In: Medellı´n, R.A., Equihua,
C., Chetkiewicz, C.-L.B., Crawshaw, P.G., Jr.Jr., Rabinowitz, A.,
Redford, K.H., Robinson, J.G., Sanderson, E.W., Taber, A.B.
(Eds.), El Jaguar en el Nuevo Milenio. Ediciones Cientı´ﬁcas
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6
495


Universita´rias, Universidad Nacional Auto´noma de Me´xico/
Wildlife Conservation Society, New York, pp. 551–600.
Sanderson, E.W., Chetkiewicz, C.-L.B., Rabinowitz, A., Redford,
K.H., Robinson, J.G., Taber, A.B., 1999b. Prioridades geogra´ﬁcas
para la conservacio´n del jaguar. In: Medellı´n, R.A., Equihua, C.,
Chetkiewicz, C.-L.B., Crawshaw, P.G., Jr.Jr., Rabinowitz, A.,
Redford, K.H., Robinson, J.G., Sanderson, E.W., Taber, A.B.
(Eds.), El Jaguar en el Nuevo Milenio. Ediciones Cientı´ﬁcas
Universita´rias, Universidad Nacional Auto´noma de Me´xico/
Wildlife Conservation Society, New York, pp. 601–627.
Saunders, N.J., 1998. Icons of Power: Feline Symbolism in the
Americas. Routledge, London.
Schaller, G.B., 1983. Mammals and their biomass on a Brazilian
ranch. Arq. Zoo. Sa˜o Paulo 31 (1), 1–36.
Schaller, G.B., Crawshaw, P.G., 1980. Movement patterns of jaguar.
Biotropica 12, 161–168.
Seymour, K.L., 1989. Panthera onca. Mammal. Species 340, 1–9.
Siemel, S., 1953. Tigrero! Ace Books. A.A. Wyn Inc., New York.
Silver, S.C., Ostro, L.E.T., Marsh, L.K., Maffei, L., Noss, A.J., Kelly, M.J.,
Wallace, R.B., Gomez, H., Crespo, G.A., 2004. The use of camera
traps for estimating jaguar (Panthera onca) abundance and
density using capture/recapture analysis. Oryx 38 (2), 148–154.
Smith, J.L.D., Tunhikorn, S., Tanhan, S., Simcharoen, S.,
Kanchanasaka, B., 1999. Metapopulation structure of tigers in
Thailand. In: Seidensticker, J., Christie, S., Jackson, P. (Eds.),
Riding the Tiger: Tiger Conservation in Human-dominated
Landscapes. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp.
166–175.
Soisalo, M.K., 2004. Estimating jaguar (Panthera onca) densities
usingi camera-trap capture–recapture surveys in a southern
Pantanal ranch, Brazil. M.Phil. Dissertation, Wildlife Research
Group, University of Cambridge, UK.
Sunquist, M.E., Sunquist, F.C., 2002. Wild Cats of the World. The
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA.
Swarts, F.A., 2000.‘‘The Pantanal in the 21st Century: For the
Planet’s Largest Wetland, an Uncertain Future’’ in The
Pantanal of Brazil, Bolivia and Paraguay. Hudson Mac Arthur
2000. Waterland Research Institute.
Wallace, R.B., Gomez, H., Ayala, G., Espinoza, F., 2003. Camera
trapping for jaguar (Panthera onca) in the Tuichi Valley, Bolivia.
Mastozoologia Neotropical/J. Neotrop. Mammal. 10 (1), 133–139.
White, G.C., Anderson, D.R., Burnham, K.P., Otis, D.L., 1982.
Capture–recapture and removal methods for sampling closed
populations. Los Alamos National Laboratory Publication LA
8787 NERP, Los Alamos, NM, USA.
Wilson, K.R., Anderson, D.R., 1985. Evaluation of two density
estimators of small mammal population size. J. Mammal. 66,
13–21.
496
B I O L O G I C A L C O N S E R V A T I O N 1 2 9 ( 2 0 0 6 ) 4 8 7 –4 9 6
