--- 
source: copy_2007 000n-3.pdf
--- 

SURVIVAL AND DEVELOPMENT OF OTTER COLONIES ON THE RHONE-ALPES 
REGION IN FRANCE, IN RELATION TO PCB CONTAMINATION 
 
A.  MAZET1, P. BERNY2, G. KECK 
Ecole Nationale Veterinaire de Lyon, Laboratoire de Toxicologie, PB83, 69280 Marcy l’Etoile, France. 
1.  email:  alexmazet@yahoo.fr;  2.  email:  p.berny@vet-lyon.fr  
 
The purpose of this poster is to present the status of the otter in Ardèche and Drôme, and to 
determine PCB contaminant burdens in fish to assess whether such burdens are likely to have 
adverse impacts on the reproduction and on the expansion of this species. 
 
 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Study area: The rivers being studied were the Ardèche river, the Drôme river and their 
tributaries.  
Laboratory analysis methods: Fish were captured using electric fishing. PCBs were 
extracted and PCB concentrations were determined with a chromatograph equipped with an 
electron-capture detector. (Berny et al., 2002) 
Method of research: To detect the presence of otters, the traditional methods of research 
were used (prints and spraints). (MACDONALD AND MASON, 1994). 
 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
 
The mean concentration of PCBs in the samples of fish was 135 µg.kg-1 wet weight. It is 
considered as an average scenario, because otters eat any type of fish, without selecting them 
(MAZET, 2002). This concentration would be considered problematic for Mustelidae (WEBER, 
1990).  
With a worst case scenario (diet made only of eels), the mean concentration would be 
524 µg.kg-1 wet weight. This concentration would be considered dangerous to the species and 
stop otter reproduction (MACDONALD ET AL., 1994). 
With more recent values, our average scenario of exposure is considered without 
effect (LEONARD ET AL., 1994).  
The hypothesis that otters are equally sensitive to the effects of PCBs is the basis for 
these extrapolations. In fact, mink are known to be particularly sensitive to PCBs, and 
threshold values could be reconsidered for otters. 
In Drôme, studies began in September 2002 and relate to the Drôme river and its 
tributaries, the basins of Lez, Jabron and Roubion. For the first year of study (2002), no index 
of presence of otter could be highlighted. 
 
 
CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTS  
 
- This poster shows that contamination with PCBs of fish can pose a problem for otter 
reproduction.  
- The thresholds values are discussed and called in question. 
- The status of the otter populations is well known in Ardèche (2001). 
- The earliest data on Drôme go back to 1982. We will study the status of the otter in Drôme, 


the environment and the possibilities of re-introduction or recolonisation. 
 
REFERENCES 
BENDELE R., 2000. Répartition de la loutre (Lutra lutra) dans le bassin versant Rhône-Méditerranée du 
département de l’Ardèche. CORA, 50pp. 
BERNY P., SADOUL N., DOL S., VIDEMANN B., KAYSER Y. AND HAFNER H., 2002. Impact of local agricultural 
and industrial pratices on organic contamination of little Egret (Egretta garzetta) eggs in the Rhône delta, 
Southern France. Environmental Toxicoical. Chemistry. 21: 520-526. 
LEONARDS P.E.G., SMIT M.D., DE JONGH A.W.J.J., VAN HATTUM B.G.M., 1994. Evaluation of dose-response 
relationships for the effects of PCBs on the reproduction of mink (Mustela vison). Institute for Environmental 
studies, Dutch Otterstation Foundation, Free University, Amsterdam, rapp. N°R94/6, 50pp. 
MAZET A., 2002. Relation entre la pollution par les polychlorobiphényles et les populations de loutres de la 
région Rhône-Alpes. Rapport de DEA Méthodes de recherche sur l’environnement et la santé, 67pp. 
MACDONALD S.M. AND MASON C.F., 1994. Status and conservation needs of the otter (Lutra lutra) in the 
western Paleartic. Nature and Environment, Council of Europe Press, 67: 54pp. 
WEBER D., 1990. La fin de la loutre en Suisse. Rapport final du “Groupe Loutre Suisse”. Cahier de 
l’environnement 128: 79-88. 
 
