--- 
source: copy_2007 000n-4.pdf
--- 

PESTICIDE POISONING IN OTTERS IN FRANCE:  DATA FROM THE SAGIR NETWORK 
 
A. MAZET & P. BERNY 
 
Ecole Nationale Veterinaire de Lyon, Laboratoire de Toxicologie, PB83, 69280 Marcy l’Etoile, France. 
 email:  alexmazet@yahoo.fr 
 
 
OBJECTIVE 
 
The purpose of this poster is to present cases of pesticide poisoning in otters collected in 
France. The toxicology laboratory of the veterinary college is part of a nation-wide disease 
surveillance network (SAGIR), under the supervision of the National Hunting and Wildlife 
Office (ONCFS). The laboratory receives between 300 and 800 samples for suspected 
poisoning in wildlife per year. 
 
 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Case collection: The study comprised cases spontaneously submitted to the toxicology 
laboratory, through a collaborative network (SAGIR), but also samples collected by the 
European mink network and sent for analysis by GREGE and collaborating veterinarians 
involved in wildlife pathology submitted cases.  
Laboratory analysis methods: for each case submitted, analyses were performed 
according to lesions and information available on signs or local use of pesticides. 
Organophosphates and carbamate insecticides were analysed according to BERNY ET AL. A 
specific method for anticoagulant (AVK) rodenticides is also available (BERNY ET AL., 1995). 
Poisoning is confirmed when a product is detected at a high concentration and 
associated with lesions compatible with acute poisoning. 
 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
- 18 otters were analysed among the 3078 cases of suspected poisoning received between 
1997 and 2002 (0.6% of all cases) 
- Poisoning was confirmed in 5 cases (2 AVK, 3 Insecticides), i.e.  27.8% of otter cases 
- Poisoning is confirmed in 55.5% of all wildlife cases 
- In most instances, very little information is available on circumstances of death and lesions 
- Secondary poisoning is described in many predator species with bromadiolone, but there is 
no report of bromadiolone poisoning in Mustelids like otters. Bromadiolone, as with most 
AVK, is accumulated in the liver and may kill rodents after a single feed but only after a few 
days.  Therefore poisoned rodents may be weakened and easily predated before they 
eventually die of AVK poisoning (BERNY ET AL., 1997; SHORE ET AL, 1999). 
- In areas where otter populations are scarce, the use of bromadiolone against Coypu may be a 
threat to the population 
 
 
CONCLUSION AND PROSPECT 
 
- This poster shows that acute poisoning may be a potential problem in some areas. 


- AVK poisoning occurs as a secondary poisoning problem, probably due to the ingestion of 
young coypu poisoned by bromadiolone or by scavenging carcasses. 
- The use of AVK or any pesticide should be weighed against its benefits in areas where 
endangered species co-exist.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
BERNY P., BURONFOSSE T. & LORGUE G., 1995. A new simple high performance thin layer chromatographic 
technique (HPTLC) for the simultaneous determination of eight anticoagulant compounds in the liver of animals.  
Journal of  Analytical Toxicology, 19: 576-580.  
BERNY P., BURONFOSSE T., LAMARQUE F. & LORGUE G., 1997. Field evidence of secondary poisoning of 
foxes (Vulpes vulpes) and buzzards (Buteo buteo) by bromadiolone: a 4-year survey. Chemosphere, 35: 1817-
1829 
BOUCHARDY C., MAURIN H., ROSOUX R. & TOURNEBIZE T., 1993. Evolution de la répartition de la loutre 
d’Europe (Lutra lutra) en France. S.F.E.P.M. Groupe Loutre, M.N.H.N., Paris. 
HUGUET X. 1998. Intoxication par la bromadiolone. Thèse Doctorat Vétérinaire, Université Cl Bernard, Lyon I, 
pp 111. 
SHORE R.F., BIRKS J.D.S. & FREESTONE P. 1999. Exposure of non-target vertebrates to second-generation 
rodenticides in Britain, with particular reference to the polecat (Mustela putorius). New Zealand Journal of 
Ecology. 23:  199-206 
