--- 
source: copy_t0725e05.pdf
--- 

Cetacea 
29
51a.
51b.
Less than 15 teeth in each half of both jaws: flippers slightly rounded at tip: distinct dorsal
cape; head rounded from above and side: maximum body length 2.6 m (Fig. 93) . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pygmy killer whale (Feresa attenuata) p. 128
More than 15 teeth per side of each jaw; flippers sharply pointed at tip; face often has
triangular dark mask; faint cape that dips low below dorsal fin; head triangular from above;
extremely short, indistinct beak may be present in younger animals; maximum body
length 2.75 m (Fig. 94) . . . . . . . . . . Melon-headed whale (Peponocephala electra) p. 130
less than 15 teeth in each
half of both jaws
flippers slightly
rounded at tip
Fig. 93 Feresa attenuata
more than 15
teeth in each half
of both jaws
pointed at tip
Fig. 94 Peponocephala electra
52a. Head long and conical; beak runs smoothly into forehead, with no crease; body dark grey
to black above and white below, with many scratches and splotches; narrow dorsal cape;
flippers very large; 20 to 27 slightly wrinkled teeth in each half of both jaws; maximum
body length 2.8 m (Fig. 95) . . . . . . . . . Rough-toothed dolphin (Steno bredanensis) p. 138
52b.  Beak distinct from forehead (however, there may not be a prominent crease between
beak 
and 
melon) 
(Fig. 
96) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 
53
beak runs smoothly into
beak distinct from
Fig. 95 Steno bredanensis 
Fig. 96
53a. Beak very short and well-defined (less than 2.5% of body length); body stocky (Fig. 97). . . + 54
53b. Beak moderate to long (greater than 3% of body length) (Fig. 98) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 60
beak very short
beak moderate to
I
long
Fig. 97 
Fig. 98
flippers sharply
forehead
forehead
forehead
click for previous page


30
Marine Mammals of the World
54a.
54b.
55a.
Flippers, flukes, and dorsal fin small; broad dark stripe from eye to anus area (muted in
some animals); dorsal fin slightly recurved and uniformly dark; extremely short, but
well-defined beak; grooves on palate; 38 to 44 teeth in each side of each jaw; maximum
length at least 2.6 m (Fig. 99) . . . . . . . . . . Fraser’s dolphin (Lugenodelphis hosei) p. 168
Dorsal 
fin 
large; 
no 
palatal 
grooves 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Lagenorhynchus sp.) + 55
dorsal fin small
Fig. 99 Lugenodelphis hosei
Body sharply demarcated black and white, with distinct white hourglass pattern on side,
and white belly; dorsal fin strongly falcate; about 28 teeth in each row; maximum size to
2 m; distribution limited to colder waters of circumpolar Antarctic currents (Fig. 100) . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Hourglass dolphin (Lugenorhynchus cruciger) p. 148
55b.  Colour pattern complex with light grey patches on sides 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 56
distinct white hourglass bat-
tern on side
Fig. 100 Lagenorhynchus cruciger
56a. Body mostly black to dark grey, with white to light grey patches on the sides, and white
belly and beak; dorsal fin large and falcate; 22 to 27 teeth in each row; maximum size to
3.5 m; distribution limited to cold waters of North Atlantic (Fig. 101) . ,. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
.
White-beaked dolphin (Lugenorhynchus albirostris) p. 144
56b. Prominent 
light 
grey 
flank. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
+ 
57
Fig. 101 Lagenorhynchus albirostris


Cetacea 
31
57a.
57b.
58a.
58b.
59a.
59b.
Back dark grey, belly white, and sides light grey with white (below the dorsal fin) and
yellowish brown (on the tail stock) patches; black eye ring; extremely deepened tail stock;
30 to 40 teeth in each row; distribution limited to cold waters of the North Atlantic
(Fig. 
102).  . . . . .   . . . . . . . . Atlantic white-sided dolphin (Lagenorhynchus acutus) p. 146
Large light grey thoracic patch and grey stripes on tail stock with extensions running
forward to thoracic area. 
. . . . . . . . . . .   .   .    .   .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 58
extremely deepened tail
stock
black eye ring
Fig. 102 Lagenorhynchus acutus
Black to dark grey above, white below, with light grey patches on sides; face, beak, melon,
and most of the chin greyish black; body relatively robust; 27 to 33 teeth in each row;
maximum size to 2.5 m; known distribution limited to southern South America and around
Palmerston Atoll (although the latter is possibly extralimital) (Fig. 103) . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Peale’s dolphin (Lagenorhynchus austrulis) p. 150
Much of face and lower jaw white to light grey; dorsal fin bicoloured . . . . . . . . . . . . . --f 59
face greyish black
Fig. 103 Lugenorhynchus australis
Appendages relatively large; dorsal fin bicoloured and falcate (sometimes extremely
hooked); back dark grey with light “suspender stripes” from forehead to tail stock, white
belly, light grey thoracic patches (black lines separate belly from sides); 23 to 36 pairs of
teeth in each jaw; maximum body length 2.5 m; distribution limited to North Pacific
(Fig. 
104). . . . . . , . . . . Pacific white-sided dolphin (Lagenorhynchus obliquidens) p. 140
Belly white, back dark, flank patch light grey (no black line separates thoracic patch and
belly); dorsal fin and flippers bicoloured; 27 to 36 teeth in each tooth row; maximum length
2.1 m; distribution limited to Southern Hemisphere (known mostly from South America,
southern Africa, and New Zealand) (Fig. 105) .Dusky dolphin (Lagenorhynchus obscurus) p. 142
Fig. 104 Lagenorhynchus obliquidens 
Fig. 105 Lugenorhynchus obscurus


60a. Less than 39 teeth per tooth row; colour pattern mostly uniform grey (may be lighter
below) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
60b. Greater than 39 teeth per row; colour pattern generally with bold stripes, patches, or spots. . . 
64
61a.
61b.
Moderately robust; 20 to 26 teeth in each half of upper jaw, 18 to 24 in lower jaw (teeth
may be extensively worn or missing); body to 3.8 m; moderately long robust snout set off
by distinct crease; colour dark to light grey dorsally, fading to white or even pink on belly
(Fig. 106)   . . . .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus)  p. 154
In each tooth row 26 or more teeth: indistinct crease between melon and beak . . . . . . . + 62
20-26 teeth in each
distinct crease
half of upper jaw
Fig. 106. Tursiops truncatus
62a.
62b.
Back dark grey and belly light; beak long without distinct crease; low triangular to slightly
falcate dorsal fin; 26 to 35 teeth in each tooth row; maximum size to 2.1 m; distribution
limited to coasts, rivers, and lakes of the east coast of South America from Panama to
southern Brazil, including the Amazon and Orinoco drainage basins (Fig. 107) . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tucuxi (Sotalia fluviatilis)  p. 132
Body grey with bluish, cream, or pink tinge, and light belly: base of dorsal fin of adults
often expanded to form longitudinal ridge, especially west of Bay of Bengal; beak long,
crease indistinct; 27 to 38 teeth in each tooth row; maximum size to 2.8 m (Figs 108
and 
109). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . (Hump-backed dolphin) -_) 63
dorsal fin low and triangular
to slightly falcate
63a.
63b.
Fig. 107 Sotalia fluviatilis
Distribution limited to Indo-Pacific, from the southern tip of Africa to Australia and eastern
China 
(Fig. 
108) 
. . . . . . . . . . Indo-Pacific hump-backed dolphin (Sousa chinensis) p. 134
Distribution limited to Atlantic off West Africa (Fig. 109) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Atlantic hump-backed dolphin (Sousa teuszii) p. 136
Fig. 108 Sousa chinensis 
Fig. 109 Sousa teuszii
61
32 
Marine Mammals of the World


64a.
64b.
65a.
65b.
66a.
66b.
67a.
67b.
Dorsal fin erect to slightly falcate; back dark and belly white; tan to buff thoracic patch
and light grey streaked tail stock form an hourglass pattern that crosses below dorsal fin:
cape forms a distinctive V below dorsal fin; stripe from chin to flipper (contacts gape in
some individuals); maximum size 2.5 m; 40 to 61 teeth in each row; palate with 2 deep
longitudinal grooves (Fig. 110) 
. . . . . . . . . . . Common dolphin (Delphinus delphis)  p. 166
No hourglass pattern on side; palatal grooves, if present, shallow . . . . . . (Stenella sp.) + 65
stripe from chin to flipper
Fig. 110 Delphinus delphis
Colour pattern black to dark grey on back, white on belly, prominent black stripes from
eye to anus and eye to flipper; light grey spinal blaze extending to below dorsal fin (not
always present); shallow palatal grooves often present; 39 to 55 teeth in each row;
maximum size 2.6 m (Fig. 111) . . . . . . . . . . Striped dolphin (Stenella coeruleoalba) p. 164
Generally, no stripe from eye to anus; distribution limited to tropical and warm temperate
waters 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
66
stripe from eye to anus 
Fig. 111 Stenella coeruleoalba
Light to heavy spotting present on dorsum of adults (on some individuals, spots may
appear 
absent); 
no 
palatal 
grooves. 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Spotted dolphin) 
+ 67
No spotting on dorsum of adults; cape dips to lowest point at level of dorsal fin; stripe
from eye to flipper: shallow palatal grooves often present 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -+ 68
Body moderately robust, dark grey above, with white belly: light spinal blaze; slight to
heavy spotting on adults (occasionally spotting nearly absent); maximum size 2.3 m; 30
to 42 teeth per row; distribution limited to warm waters of the Atlantic Ocean (Fig. 112)
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Atlantic spotted dolphin (Stenefla frontalis) p. 158
Dorsal fin narrow and falcate; dark cape that sweeps to lowest point on side in front of
dorsal fin; dark stripe from gape to flipper; beak tip and lips white; adults with light to
extensive spotting and grey bellies (spotting sometimes absent); 34 to 48 teeth in each
half of each jaw; maximum size 2.6 m (Fig. 113). 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pantropical spotted dolphin (Stenella uttenuatu) p. 156
beak tip and
lips white
belly white 
Fig. 112 Stenella frontalis
belly grey in adults
Fig. 113 Stenella attenuata
Cetacea 
33
hourglass pattern


34 
Marine Mammals of the World
68a.
68b.
1) Body and beak relatively robust; heavy spotting that nearly obliterates cape; known
distribution limited to within 185 km of the coast in the eastern tropical Pacific . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Coastal spotted dolphin (Coastal form of Stenella attenuata)
2) Body and beak slender; spotting slight to moderate; maximum body length 2.3 m;
distributed more than 30 km from shore in eastern tropical Pacific and found in oceanic
waters 
worldwide 
. . . . . . . Offshore spotted dolphin (Offshore form of Stenella attenuata)
Body colour three-part (dark grey cape, light grey flanks, white belly); cape dips in 2
places (above eye, and below dorsal fin); snout light grey with dark tip, dark lips, and
dark line from tip to apex of melon; often, dark “moustache” on top of beak; more robust
than spinner dolphins; 38 to 49 teeth in each tooth row; maximum size 2.0 m; distribution
limited to tropical Atlantic Ocean (Fig. 114) . . . . . Clymene dolphin (Stenella clymene) p. 162
Dorsal fin slightly falcate to canted forward; beak exceedingly long and slender; 45 to 65
very fine sharply pointed teeth per tooth row; maximum size 2.4 m (Fig. 115) . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Spinner dolphin (Stenella longirostris) p. 160
dark “moustache”
beak exceedingly long
and slender
Fig, 114 Stenella clymene 
Fig. 115 Stenella longirostris
1) Colour pattern three-part (white belly, light grey sides, dark grey cape); dorsal fin
falcate to erect; body more robust than in other forms; post-anal hump of adult males
nearly absent; distribution worldwide, except eastern tropical Pacific. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Gray’s spinner dolphin (S. 1. longirostris)
2) Pigmentation monotone grey, with light patches around genital area and axillae; dorsal
fin triangular to canted forward (extremely canted in adult males): adult males with
deepened tail stock and enlarged post-anal hump; maximum size 2 m; known distribution
limited to the eastern tropical Pacific east of 145ºW
. . Eastern spinner dolphin (S. 1. orientulis)
3) Pigmentation monotone grey; apparently, no light patches around genital area and
axillae; dorsal fin triangular to canted forward (extremely canted in adult males); adult
males with deepened tail stock and enlarged post-anal hump; known distribution limited
to 80 km offshore from southern Mexico to Panama in the eastern tropical Pacific . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . Central American spinner dolphin (S. 1. centroamericana)
4) Body slightly more robust than above 2 forms; colour pattern largely bipartite, with
dark dorsal cape, and white belly and lower sides; dorsal fin slightly falcate to slightly
canted (tending towards canted in adult males): post-anal hump of adult males small to
moderate; distribution limited to offshore eastern tropical Pacific 
. . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .Whitebelly spinner dolphin (hybrid between S. 1. longirostris and S. 1. orientalis)
click for next page
