--- 
source: copy_t0725e10.pdf
--- 

64 
                                                                                      Marine Mammals of the World
2.4 SUBORDER ODONTOCETI - Toothed Whales
With the exception of the sperm whale (males of which can reach lengths of at least 18 m), odontocetes are
small to medium-sized cetaceans. Sexual dimorphism is the rule. Toothed whales are characterized by the
presence of teeth throughout life (although teeth are buried in the gum or jawbone in some species, worn or
lost in others, and take peculiar shapes in still others), a single blowhole, an asymmetrical skull with a concave
profile, a sternum with 3 or more parts, a complex system of nasal sacs, and a fatty organ in the forehead
areacalled the melon. All are hypothesized to be capable of echolocation (i.e., producing specialized sounds,
and receiving and processing the echoes from these sounds to navigate, find food, and avoid predators),
although this ability has been experimentally verified for only a handful of species held successfully in
captivity. Odontocetes take individual prey, which consists largely of fishes and squids.
2.4.1 Guide to Families of Toothed Whales
Sperm Whale (1 species in 1 genus) p. 68
The sperm whale is the largest toothed cetacean and has
the highest degree of sexual dimorphism. There is a low
dorsal hump, followed by a series of crenulations. It has a
large head with a squarish profile, narrow underslung lower
jaw, and functional teeth only in the lower jaw (these fit into
sockets in the upper jaw). The blowhole is located at the
left front of the head. The head is highly modified, and is
divided into sections called the “junk" and the spermaceti
organ, or “case.” The spermaceti organ is a large oil-filled [
reservoir, the function of which is controversial. Sperm
whales have a dish shape to the facial area of the skull,
extreme cranial asymmetry, and a long rostrum. Sperm
whales are known to be capable of very deep, long
Fig. 186 Physeteridae
dives.
Pygmy and Dwarf Sperm Whales (2 species in 1 genus) p. 70
The pygmy and dwarf sperm whales are much smaller
and share only a slight resemblance to the great sperm
whale. They have blunt squarish heads, with under-
slung lower jaws (like their larger counterparts), but the
head is much smaller than in the sperm whale, and the
blowhole is not located at the front of the head as it is in
the sperm whale. The skull structure is curious; it shares
a basin-like facial area and great asymmetry with the
sperm whale, but is much shorter. The dorsal fin in both
species is larger than that of the sperm whale. The
biology of these animals is very poorly known.
Fig. 187 Kogiidae
ODONTOCETI 
PHYSETERIDAE 
KOGIIDAE
click for previous page


Cetacea - Odontoceti 
65
Narwhal and White Whale (2 species in 2 genera) p. 74
This is a family of small whales (less than 6 m in length),
with stocky bodies, blunt bulbous heads, broad rounded
flippers, and no dorsal fins. Both species are inhabitants
of arctic and subarctic areas of the Northern Hemi-
sphere. The skull is unique in that, in profile, it is very
flat, with little or no rise in the area of the nares. Unlike
the situation in most cetaceans, the cervical vertebrae
are generally not fused, allowing monodontids a great
range of neck flexibility.
lllll
Fig. 188 Monodontidae
Beaked Whales (19 species in 5 genera) p. 78
The taxonomy of this group is unresolved and is cur-
rently under study. Although likely to change, there are
19 species currently recognized. The beaked whales
are medium-sized cetaceans (4 to 13 m long), which as
a rule, have reverse sexual dimorphism (females larger
than males). In general, beaked whales have a pro-
nounced beak, relatively small dorsal fin set far back on
the body, small flippers that fit into depressions on the
sides, 2 short throat grooves, flukes without a notch, and
no more than 1 or 2 pairs of functional teeth in the lower
jaw of males only (major exceptions are Berardius, in
which females also have 2 pairs of exposed teeth, and
Tasmacetus, in which both sexes have long rows of
slender functional teeth). Beaked whales are poorly
known as a rule; however, most are thought to be
deep-diving squid feeders. They generally travel in
small groups.
Fig. 189 Ziphiidae
Ocean Dolphins (32 species in 17 genera) p. 118
The family Delphinidae has been called a “taxonomic
trash basket,” because many small to medium-sized
odontocetes of various forms have been lumped to-
gether in this group for centuries. Consequently, the
so-called delphinids are diverse in form. They range in
size from the 1 to 1.8 m dolphins of the genera Sotalia
and Cephalorhynchus to the killer whale, in which males
can reach lengths of at least 9.8 m. However, most
delphinids share the following characteristics: a marine
habitat, a noticeable beak, conical teeth, and a large
falcate dorsal fin set near the middle of the back. There
are exceptions to every one of these rules, except the
presence of basically conical teeth. u
Fig. 190 Delphinidae
MONODONTIDAE
ZIPHIIDAE
DELPHINIDAE


Porpoises (6 species in 4 genera) p. 182
Porpoises (members of the family Phocoenidae) are
small cetaceans (all less than 2.5 m) that some taxono-
mists classify with the delphinids. They tend to be
coastal in distribution, rather stocky in form, with either
a short indistinct beak or no beak at all. Most have a
short triangular dorsal fin and all have have spade-
shaped teeth. In some species, females are larger than
males. Phocoenids appear to live in smaller groups and
have a simpler social structure than do most delphinids.
Fig. 191 Phocoenidae
This family includes the susu and bhulan of the Ganges
and lndus rivers, respectively. Animals in this family are
nearly blind, and apparently rely largely on echolocation
to navigate and find food. The body is small (to about
2.6 m) and “mushy.” There is a long foreceps-like beak,
with front teeth that extend outside the closed mouth.
The blowhole is a longitudinal slit. The susu and bhulan
have no true dorsal fin, only a low dorsal ridge. The most
characteristic feature of the skull is a pair of enlarged
maxillary crests that overhang the rostrum.
The single species in this family, the boto of the Amazon
and Orinoco drainages in South America, is unique in
several ways. It is a very large river dolphin, with a
moderately long, thick snout dotted with sparse hairs.
The dorsal ridge is very low and usually indistinct. Many
adults are nearly totally pink in colour. The rear teeth
are flattened and the zygomatic arches of the skull are
incomplete.
Fig. 192 Platanistidae
Boto (1 species in 1 genus) p. 198
Fig. 193 Iniidae
PHOCOENIDAE
INIIDAE
PLATANISTIDAE          Ganges and lndus River Dolphins (2 species in 1 genus) p. 194
66 
                                                                                      Marine Mammals of the World


Cetacea - Odontoceti  
 67
Baiji and Franciscana (2 species in 2 genera) p. 200
This family contains 2 types of dolphins, one a true river
dolphin of the Yangtze River in China, the other a coastal
marine species of the east coast of South America.
Females are larger than males in both species. Both
have long beaks (extremely so in the franciscana) and
rather low, triangular dorsal fins.
Fig. 194 Pontoporiidae 
PONTOPORIIDAE
click for next page
