--- 
source: copy_t0725e06.pdf
--- 

35
2.2 Key to Identification of Skulls of Cetacean Families
Marine Mammals of the World
1a.
1b.
Teeth absent; skull bilaterally symmetrical; lower jaw lacking bony symphysis; size always
large 
(adults 
>1 m) (Fig. 116). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(Mysticeti) 
+ 2
Teeth present (although they may not emerge from jaw bones in Monodon or some
beaked whales); skull generally asymmetrical; lower jaw possessing a bony symphysis;
skull generally relatively small (>1.5 m, except in Physeter) (Fig. 117)
. . . . . (Odontoceti) + 5
skull bilaterally symmetrical 
no bony symphysis
\
DORSAL VIEW OF SKULL
no teeth
LATERAL VIEW OF SKULL
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Fig. 116 Mysticeti
skull asymmetrical
DORSAL VIEW OF SKULL
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
tooth
LATERAL VIEW OF SKULL
Fig. 117 Odontoceti
 teeth
bony symphysis
click for previous page


2a. 
Rostrum moderately to strongly arched in side view: from dorsal or ventral view, occipital
condyles do not generally extend to or past posterior portion of cranium (Fig. 118) . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(Balaenidae or Neobalaenidae) + 3
2b. 
Rostrum flat or only slightly arched in side view; from dorsal or ventral view, occipital
condyles extending to or beyond posterior portion of cranium (Fig. 119) . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . 
(Balaenopteridae or Eschrichtiidae) + 4
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 118
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 119
3a. 
Base of rostrum much wider than tip; from side, rostrum moderately arched (Fig. 120) .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Neobalaenidae: Caperea (Pygmy right whale) p. 48
3b. 
Base of rostrum only slightly wider than tip; from side, rostrum strongly arched; mandibles
extremely bowed out (Fig. 121) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Balaenidae: Right or bowhead whales
base of rostrum much
wider than tip
DORSAL VIEW 
DORSAL VIEW
Fig. 120 Neobalaenidae 
Fig. 121 Balaenidae
4a. 
Rostrum slightly arched from side; nasals large; frontals exposed on vertex (Fig. 122) .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Eschrichtiidae: Eschrichtius (Gray whale) p. 62
4b. 
Rostrum relatively flat from side (may be slightly arched in sei whale); nasals reduced;
frontals barely, or not at all, visible on vertex (Fig. 123) 
. . . . . . . Balaenopteridae: Rorquals
nasals reduced
DORSAL VIEW OF CRANIUM 
DORSAL VlEW OF CRANIUM
Fig. 122 Eschrichtiidae 
Fig. 123 Balaenopteridae
nasals large
wider than tip
base of rostrum only slightly
rostrum moder-
ately arched
rostrum slightly
arched
rostrum strongly arched
rostrum flat
occipital condyles
36 
Marine Mammals of the World


Cetacean skulls 
37
5a. 
Anterior cranial region basin-like; skull extremely asymmetrical; left naris much larger
than right: teeth generally confined to lower jaw (except in some dwarf sperm whales)
(Fig. 
124). 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(Physeteroidea) 
+ 6
5b. Anterior cranial region not basin-like; skull slightly to strongly asymmetrical: 2 nares
similar 
in 
size 
(Fig. 
125) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 7
2 nares similar
DORSAL VIEW OF CRANlUM 
DORSAL VIEW OF CRANIUM
Fig. 124 Physeteroidea 
Fig. 125
6a. 
Rostrum long (greater than half length of skull); zygomatic arches complete; 18 to 25 pairs
of teeth; mandibular symphysis long (>30% of mandible length) (Fig. 126) . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Physeter (Sperm whale) p. 68
6b. 
Rostrum short (less than half length of skull); zygomatic arches incomplete; 8 to 16 pairs
of teeth; mandibular symphysis short (<30% of mandible length) (Fig. 127) . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..Kogiidae: Kogia (Pygmy or dwarf sperm whale) p. 70
zygomatic arches complete
zygomatic arches incomplete
mandibular  symphysis long 
LATERAL VIEW OF CRANIUM
7a.
7b.
LATERAL VIEW
OF CRANIUM
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Fig. 126 Physeteridae 
Fig. 127 Kogiidae
Large teeth restricted to lower jaw (small, conical upper jaw teeth are present in
Tasmacetus); elevated maxillary ridges behind nasals; rostrum long and slender, depth
nearly as great as, or greater than, width (Fig. 128). . . . . . . . . . . Ziphiidae: Beaked whales
Teeth of uniform size (except in some Monodon); no maxillary ridges (except in Platanista, in
which they arch inwards and upwards over the nasals); rostrum wider than deep (Fig. 129) . . . + 8
elevated maxillary ridges -    
   no maxillary ridges
LATERAL VIEW OF SKULL
Fig. 128 Ziphiidae 
LATERAL VIEW OF SKULL 
Fig. 129
mandibular sym-
physis short
teeth in upper jaw
no teeth in upper jaw
in size
left naris large
basin-like region


8a. 
Mandibular symphysis long (at least one-third length of mandible): rostrum long and
narrow, of nearly uniform width from base to tip (Fig. 130) . . . . . . . . . (Platanistoidea) + 9
8b. 
Mandibular symphysis relatively short (generally less than one-third length of mandible);
rostrum 
generally 
narrows 
appreciably 
toward 
tip 
(Fig. 
131) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . --f 11
mandibular symphysis short
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Fig. 130 Platanistoidea 
Fig. 131
9a. 
Well-developed maxillary crests present; 26 to 39 teeth in each tooth row, anterior teeth
larger than posterior ones (Fig. 132) . . . . . . Platanistidae: Platanista (River dolphins) p. 194
9b. 
No enlarged maxillary crests; teeth of approximately uniform size (Fig. 133) . . . . . . . . . + 10
maxillary crest present
LATERAL VIEW OF SKULL
Fig. 132 Platanistidae
no enlarged maxillary crest
LATERAL VIEW OF SKULL
Fig. 133
10a. Mandibular symphysis less than one-half length of mandible; 23 to 35 teeth in each row,
those at back have flattened crowns (Fig. 134) . . . . . . . . . . . . . Iniidae: Inia (Boto)  p. 198
10b. Mandibular symphysis at least one-half length of mandible: teeth undifferentiated
(Fig. 
135) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pontoporiidae: Baiji and Franciscana
mandibular symphysis less                                    mandibular symphysis at
least 1/2 length of mandible
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE 
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Fig. 134 Iniidae 
Fig. 135 Pontoporiidae
than 1/2 length of mandible
mandibular symphysis long
38 
Marine Mammals of the World


39 
Marine Mammals of the World
11a. Dorsal profile of skull nearly flat from side; teeth confined to front two-third of jaws, less
than 12 in each row (Fig. 136) . . . . . . . . . . . . Monodontidae: White whale and narwhal
11b. Dorsal profile of skull rising sharply at level of nares; teeth generally numerous in both
jaws (except for Grampus, which has teeth only in the lower jaw ) (Fig. 137) . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Delphinidae or Phocoenidae) --f 12
profile rising sharp1yl
Fig. 136 Monodontidae 
Fig. 137
12a. Teeth spade-shaped, with blunt tips; raised bony bosses in front of nares; 10 to 28 teeth
in each row (Fig. 138). 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  . . .    Phocoenidae: Porpoises
12b. Teeth circular or oval in cross-section, generally with pointed tips (except in Orcaella, or
unless worn or broken); no bosses in front of nares (Fig. 139) . . Delphinidae: Oceanic dolphins
teeth with blunt tips
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 138 Phocoenidae
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 139 Delphinidae
bony bosses
teeth generally
with pionted tips
profile flat
click for next page
