--- 
source: copy_t0725e02.pdf
--- 

Introduction 
1
1. INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL REMARKS
nterest in wildlife in general, and marine mam-
I mals in particular, has increased significantly in
recent years, both in the general public and in the
scientific and management communities. More
people than ever are including wildlife watching in
their activities, and this includes educational and
adventure expeditions to see wild marine mammals
up close. At the same time, there is increasing
awareness of the integral importance of marine
mammals to healthy aquatic ecosystems, and of the
growing threats that a variety of human  activities
pose to these animals and their environments. Re-
search and education programs are seeking to bet-
ter understand and more clearly communicate the
nature of these threats and to recommend appropri-
ate steps to reduce or eliminate their impacts.
Good field guides are integral to all these activi-
ties. Although there are guides to limited geographi-
cal areas and some subsets of the world’s marine
mammal fauna, there is as yet no single comprehen-
sive guide that covers all the world’s whales, dol-
phins, porpoises, seals, sea lions, walruses,
manatees, dugongs, marine and sea otters, and
polar bears. Additionally, few of the existing guides
provide aids to identifying live animals, in-hand
specimens, and skulls. This field guide, commis-
sioned by the Food and Agricultura1 Organization of
the United Nations and the United Nations Environ-
ment Programme, is intended as the first attempt to
fill that need.
We have attempted to make this volume as com-
plete and comprehensive as possible. However, we
are aware that it is limited by the differences in the
amount and quality of information available on the
various groups, as well as by the inadequacies of
our approach towards representing what is avail-
able. Therefore, we prefer to think of this as a
starting point, to be improved by input from those
who use it in the field. Future editions will be modi-
fied to correct errors and deficiencies revealed by
extensive use. In the mean time, we hope this book
helps both amateurs and professionals with the
sometimes difficult task of confidently identifying
species of marine mammals they see alive or en-
counter dead.
Most writers use the term ‘marine mammal’ to
include  members of 5 different mammalian groups:
cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises),
sirenians (manatees and the dugong), pinnipeds
(sea lions, the walrus, and seals), marine and sea
otters, and the polar bear (Fig. 1). These diverse
groups are currently thought to represent 5 or 6
different recolonizations of the water by land-dwell-
ing ancestors. The term marine mammal, therefore,
implies no systematic or taxonomic relationship. In
fact, the cetaceans are more closely related to
horses, pigs, and zebras than they are to other
marine mammals, the pinnipeds have more in com-
mon with bears and weasels, and the sirenians are
more closely allied to elephants and hyraxes.
These differences not withstanding, however, all
marine mammals have one thing in common - they
derive all (or most) of their food from marine (or
sometimes fresh) water.
All marine mammals have undergone major ad-
aptations, which permit them to live in the water.
The cetaceans and sirenians spend their entire lives
in the water, while other marine mammals come
ashore for various reasons, at particular times in
their life cycle (most commonly to reproduce, moult,
or rest). Major structural modifications to the bodies
of cetaceans, sirenians, and pinnipeds involve the
loss of hind limbs (cetaceans and sirenians), the
adaptation of limbs for propulsion through water
(pinnipeds), and the general streamlining of the
body for hydrodynamic efficiency (all 3 groups).
Structural modifications to the marine and sea otters
and the polar bear by a marine existence are less
apparent in body form; these animals still closely
resemble their terrestrial counterparts.
Since this is an identification guide, we include
information mainly useful for identifying marine
mammal species. For more extensive introduc-
tions to the biology of mammals in general, see
Gould and McKay (1990) and Macdonald (1984).
Additional specific details on the biology of marine
mammals can be found for cetaceans in Ridgeway
and Harrison (1981a and b, 1985, 1989), Leather-
wood and Reeves (1983), Evans (1987) Harrison
and Bryden (1988), and Martin (1990); for pin-
nipeds in King (1983), Bonner (1990), Riedman
(1990a), and Reeves et al. (1992); for sirenians in
Reynolds and Odell (1991) and Reeves et al.
(1992); for marine and sea otters in Riedman
(1990b) and Reeves et al. (1992); and for polar
bears in Stirling (1988) and Reeves et al. (1992).
In addition to the above references, several recent
works contain excellent summaries of some of the
threats to marine mammal populations. These are
Bonner (1982), Northridge (1984, 1991), Perrin
(1989), Klinowska (1991), and Woodley and Lavi-
gne (1991).
click for previous page


2 
Marine Mammals of the World
Cetacea
Mysticeti
Odontoceti
marine
Fissipedia
Balaenidae (3 species)
Neobalaenidae (1 species)
Physeteridae (1 species)
Kogiidae (2 species)
Monodontidae (2 species)
Ziphiidae (19 species)
Delphinidae (32 species)
Phocoenidae (6 species)
Platanistidae (2 species)
Iniidae (1 species)
Pontoporiidae (2 species) d
Trichechidae (3 species)
Dugongidae (1 species)
Otariidae (14 species)
Odobenidae (1 species)
Phocidae (19 species)
Otters and polar bear
Mustelidae (2 species)
Ursidae (1 species)
ORDER 
SUBORDER 
FAMILY
Fig. 1 Classification of the Marine Mammals
Baleen whales
Toothed whales, dolphins, and
porpoises
Seals, sea lions, and walrus
Manatees and dugong
Sirenia
Carnivora
Pinnipedia
Balaenopteriadae (6 species)
Eschrichtiidae (1 species)


Introduction 
3
1.1 Oceanography and Marine Mammal
Distribution
Marine mammals are not randomly distributed in
the world’s oceans. It has long been known, for
example, that certain species are found exclusively
or primarily in waters of a particular depth, tempera-
ture range, or oceanographic regime, and not in
areas lacking one or all of these characteristics. For
most species, however, little is known of the particu-
lar factors that cause them to be found in one area
and not in another that appears, qualitatively at
least, the same.
One major factor affecting productivity, and thus
indirectly influencing the distribution of marine mam-
mals, is the pattern of major ocean currents (Fig. 2).
These currents are driven largely by prevailing
winds, modified in their effects by the “Coriolis
Forte.” Simply stated, the rotation of the earth
causes major surface currents to move clockwise in
the Northern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in
the Southern Hemisphere. This has different impli-
cations  for animals on east and west sides of ocean
basins. In the Northern Hemisphere, warm tropical
waters move further north along the east coasts of
continental land masses, and warm-water species
are often found unexpectedly far north. In the
Southern Hemisphere, by contrast,  cold polar wa-
ters move northward along the west coasts of con-
tinents, allowing cold-water marine mammals to
range closer to the equator.
The interplay of these surface currents and sub-
surface movements of major water masses moves
nutrients around by upwelling (the vertical turning
over of deep and surface waters) and indrift (the
bringing in of nutrients by horizontal currents). As
these nutrients and sunlight are the basic ingredi-
ents of productivity, areas of high mixing often are
more productive than still areas of little or no mixing.
Wherever oceanic conditions promote high nutrient
content,  it is likely that some species of marine
mammal will be present to exploit that richness.
Thus, the presence of marine mammals and other
high order predators and consumers in an area is
related primarily to prey, and secondarily to the
water conditions supporting that productivity. Pago-
phylic (ice-loving) marine mammals are a special
case in that their movements are closely tied to the
formation and movement of sea ice.
1.2 Marine Mammal Identification and How
to Use This Guide
Marine mammals can be difficult to identify at
sea. Even under ideal conditions, an observer often
gets little more than a brief view of a splash, blow,
dorsal fin, head, flipper, or back,  and this is often at
a great distance. Rough weather, glare, fog, or
other bad sighting conditions compound the prob-
lem. Many species appear similar to another, espe-
cially in the brief glimpses typical at sea. Animals of
some poorly known groups (most notably beaked
whales and Southern Hemisphere fur seals) are
especially difficult to identify to species, even with a
good look ata live animal or an “in hand” specimen.
For all these reasons, even experts often must log
a sighting as “unidentified” or on an easily confused
pair or group of species. In all cases, this designa-
tion, accompanied by a detailed description is pref-
erable to recording an incorrect identification.
The species identification sheets in this guide are
designed to be the primary tool used in identifying
marine mammals observed at sea. A dichotomous
key to marine mammals observed at sea would be
virtually worthless, because of the lack of useful
Fig. 2 Major Ocean Currents


4 
Marine Mammals of the World
cues for most sightings and the variability of marine
mammal behaviour. Marine mammal identification
at sea is something that must be learned through
doing. Experienced marine mammal observers, like
birders, often will be able to make an identification
based on a composite of characteristic features
including behaviour, and personal knowledge of the
local marine mammal fauna. This ability will come
with experience, guided by working with seasoned
observers and the use of a proper field guide.
We must emphasize that the distribution maps
presented for each species are approximate. The
range limits shown, especially in offshore areas, are
often little more than educated guesses, based on
limited data and considered in light of available
information on the species’ distribution and habitat
preferences elsewhere. In some  cases, the range
limits indicated are more a reflection of search effort
than of real distribution limits. Therefore, an ab-
sence of shading in a certain area does not neces-
sarily mean that the species is not found there.
Available population estimates are also of vari-
able accuracy, and should thus be used cautiously.
Techniques for estimating sizes of mammal popula-
tions at sea are still evolving and are far from stand-
ardized, and available tools have been used
unevenly, often with violations of underlying as-
sumptions. For these reasons, the shading on the
maps is intended to show only known or postulated
range, and not population density.
The status of each species is given in the identi-
fication sheets.“Endangered Species Lists” are
maintained by both the United States Fish and Wild-
life Service (USFWS) (U.S. List of Threatened and
Endangered Species) and the International Union
for the Conservation of Nature and’ Natural Re-
sources, now the World Conservation Union (IUCN
Red List). In this world guide, we present the IUCN
designations. “Endangered” status is assigned to
those species considered to be in immediate danger
of extinction. Species at risk of soon becoming
endangered are listed as “vulnerable.” Because of
incomplete information and the time lag in complet-
ing requirements for listing, these status designa-
tions do not always accurately reflect the true status
of a species (some species listed as endangered
are at no immediate risk; others not listed may be
on the verge of extinction). Nevertheless, they are
helpful as a warning that plans to exploit a given
species must proceed  only with great caution.
Marine mammals specimens “in hand” can best
be identified by using the dichotomous keys to ex-
ternal features. With such specimens, it may be
possible to view the entire body and to measure
relative proportions of features. Various features of
coloration and morphology are often useful in such
considerations. We have used geographical infor-
mation as little as possible to separate the species.
This will help to avoid biasing observers toward
making an identification based on what they think is
“supposed” to be there.
Marine mammal skulls can be keyed out using
the keys provided at the beginning of each major
section. We have assumed that no geographical
information is available, so the key can be used to
identify an untagged skull of unknown origin in a
museum.It is clear from our own work and discus-
sions with colleagues that is is not yet possible to
prepare a reliable skull key for the non-specialist.
Published keys and related literature are marred
with errors and inconsistencies. Skulls of many
species are sufficiently similar that it will be neces-
sary to examine a full series of each to define
reliable diagnostic features. Until that exercise is
completed for each species, it would be a disservice
to prepare a key to the species level. Instead, we
provide a key only to family level.
It can sometimes be very difficult, or impossible,
to identify marine mammals to species, whether
based on sightings at sea, specimens “in hand”, or
an unlabeled skull. Great variability in behaviour,
coloration, body morphology, and bone structure
can occur. Sometimes it may only be possible to
label an animal or group as “unidentified long-
snouted dolphin”, “unidentified  beaked whale,” or
“unidentified fur seal.” If this guide helps lead to an
identification in some cases and to narrow down the
choices in others, then it will have served an impor-
tant function.
1.3 The FAO Species Codes Included in the
Guide
The species codes  listed in the species accounts
are intended for use by those who need to record
catch or sighting data for reporting or database
purposes. The 3-letter code is required when re-
porting statistics to the FAO and are in use by many
countries throughout the world. An advantage of
these codes is that they are very short but the
disadvantage is that they do not contain taxonomic
information. The longer code is a taxonomic abbre-
viation for those who need a short, unique, system-
atic referente code. It contains in order,
abbreviations of the family and genus names and a
unique number for each species. The advantage of
this is that with practice, taxonomic groups can be
recognized from the code. This code is used in a
FAO database called SPECIESDAB that contains
general biological and fisheries information and will
soon be available to interested fisheries workers
and conservationists.


1.4 Illustrated Glossary of Technical Terms
tail
muzzlel
claws
Pinniped
Amphipod - A type of invertebrate that is a food
source for some  whales.
Anterior - Referring to the front (head area) of an
animal (Fig. 3).
Axillae (singular: axilla) - Armpit, or in the case of
marine mammals, “flipperpit”  (Fig. 3).
Baleen - Plates of keratin hanging from the inside
of the upper jaw of mysticetes, used instead of teeth
to capture prey (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3 Externa1 Morphology
Barnacle  - A type of sessile (mooring) crustacean
that is found living on the surface of some marine
mammals (Fig. 4).
DORSAL VIEW 
LATERAL VIEW OF HEAD
Fig. 4
Glossary     
3
rostrum
blowhole
dorsal fin
peduncle or tail stock
flukes
flipper
ventral pleats or
creases
baleen plates
forehead
beak or rostrum
gape
axillae
ear
tail
tail stock
muzzle
vibrissae
foreflipper
hallux
hind flipper
ANTERIOR
DORSAL
POSTERIOR
VENTRAL
blowhole
flipper
peduncle or tail stock
dorsal fin
creases
flipper
ear opening
Toothed whale
Sirenian
Baleen Whale
blowholes
callosities with
barnacles


6
Marine Mammals of the World
LATERAL VIEW
no mandibular
VENTRAL VIEW
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
symphysis
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
Toothed whale
nasal bones
premaxilla 
maxilla
lDORSAL VIEW
occipital
condyles
VENTRAL VIEW
Benthic - Living on or in the sea floor.
Blow - The spout of water vapor exhaled by whales.
Blowhole(s) - Nasal opening(s) on the top of the
head of cetaceans (Fig. 4).
Blubber - The specialized layer of fat just under the
skin of most marine mammals.
Baleen whale
LATERAL VIEW
Boss - A raised protruberance on the skull.
Bowriding - The act of riding on the pressure wave
in front of the bow of a ship.
Breach - A complete or nearly-complete leap from
the water, resulting in a splash.
Calf - A young cetacean or sirenian.
mandibular
palate
zygmatic arch
occipital
condyles
nares
rostrum
vertex
cranium
mandible
zygmatic arch
occipital
condyles
lDORSAL VIEW
premaxilla 
maxilla
rostrum
cranium
nares nasal
mandible
frontal bone
frontal bone
symphysis


Glossary 
7
lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
DORSAL VIEW
condyles
LATERAL VIEW
Sirenian
VENTRAL VIEW
DORSAL VIEW
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
(PC)
Pinniped
Fig. 5 Morphology of Skulls
Callosities - Areas of roughened skin on the heads
of right whales, to which whale lice and barnacles
Canines - The set of long, sharp teeth on either side
attach (Fig. 4).
of the front of the upper and lower jaws (abbreviated
C in dental formulas) (Fig. 5).
Cape - Adarker region on the back of many species
of dolphins and small whales, generally with a dis-
Cephalopod - A group of invertebrates, including
squids and octopuses, fed on by many marine mam-
tinct margin.
mals.
Circumpolar - Ranging completely around either
polar area (i.e., the Antarctic or Arctic).
sagittal crest
mandible
nares
cranium
maxilla
occipital
premaxilla
nares
maxilla
frontal 
bone
occipital
condyles
premaxilla
cranium
mandible
post-
canines
timpanic
bullae
symphysis
post-
canines (C) canines (PC)
canines (C)
incisors
incisors (I)
post-canines (PC)
canines
zygmatic arch
mandibular
(C)
(I)
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
frontal 
bone
nasal bones


8 
Marine Mammals of the World
Continental shelf - The oceanic margin of the con- 
Curvilinear length - Secondary body-length meas-
tinents, characterized by a relatively flat bottom. 
urement for pinnipeds, taken from the tip of snout to
Generally defined as the benthic area out to 200 m 
tip of tail along the back, belly, or side (note: not
depth (Fig. 6). 
comparable with standard length).
Continental slope - The oceanic region  of steep
drop-off just beyond the continental shelf. Gener-
ally defined as the benthic area of depths of 200 to
2 000 m (Fig. 6).
Copepod - A type of small crustacean fed on by
some  whales.
Deep scattering layer (DSL) - Adense aggregation
of largely light-sensitive aquatic organisms (mostly
fish and various invertebrate species) that migrates
vertically in the water column  each day (towards the
surface in darkness and deeper in brightness).
Countershading - Cryptic coloration with the upper
surface dark and the lower surface light.
Cranium - The main par-t of the skull, exclusive of
the lower jaw bones (mandibles) (Figs 5 and 7).
Crustacean - Member of a class of mostly aquatic
invertebrates that are food for many marine mam-
mals.
Dental formula - Pinnipeds, sirenians, otters, and
bears have differentiated teeth represented in a
formula in which numbers indicate the quantity of
each type of tooth in the upper and lower jaw. The
formulas presented in this guide take the following
form: Incisors (I) upper/lower, canines (C) up-
per/lower,  post-canines (PC) upper/lower.  In otters,
bears, and some  sirenians, the post-canines are
differentiated into premolars (PM) and molars  (M).
cervical 
thoracic
cranium
lumbar
vertebrae
caudal
Fig. 6 Profile of the Seabed
sternum
Fig. 7 Skeleton of Baleen 
vertebrae
vertebrae
vertebrae
mandible
vestigial
pelvis


Glossary 
9
The numbers refer to the number of teeth on each
side of the jaw (Fig. 5).
Demersal - Found on or near the bottom of the sea.
Dorsal - Relating to the upper sur-face of an animal
(Fig. 3).
Dorsal fin - The structure on the back of most
cetaceans (not supported by bone). Some  species
only have a dorsal hump or ridge, others have no
hint of a dorsal structure (Figs 3 and 8).
dorsal ridge 
falcate fin
Fig. 8 Dorsal Fins
Echolocation - The process of sending out sounds
and using the returning echoes  to locate objects
SENDING SIGNALS
RECEIVING SIGNALS
Fig. 9 Organs Associated with Echolocation
Epipelagic - Associated with the surface layer of the
oceans (< 200 m depth) (Fig. 6).
Estrus - The period of sexual receptivity of a female
mammal.
Estuary - An area partly enclosed by land, where
saltwater and freshwater meet.
Extirpate - To exterminate a species only from a
specific part of íts range.
Extralimital - Outside the normal limits of an ani-
mal’s dístributíon.
Falcate - Sickle-shaped and curved toward the tail
(Fig. 8).
Flipper - Flattened fore- or hindlimb of a marine
mammal (supported by bone) (Fig. 3).
Flukes - The horizontally flattened and blade-
shaped taíl of cetaceans or dugongs (not supported
by bone)(Fig. 3).
Fluke-up - To raise the tail flukes into the air upon
diving.
Foreflipper - The front flipper of a pinniped (Fig. 3).
Frontal bone - The major bone comprísíng the
forehead (Fig. 5).
Gape - The corner of the mouth, or the widest
opening of the mouth (Fig. 3).
Guard hairs - The long, thick, sparse outer layer of
hairs of a pinníped or otter (Fig. 10).
skin
Fig. 10 Structure of Pelt
Hallux- Dígit number 1 on the hindflipper of a pin-
niped (counting from the outside in) (Fig. 3).
Haul-out - The act of bringing the body on to land,
ice, or other substrate by a pinniped, otter, or very
rarely, a sirenian.
Herd - A coordínated group of marine mammals
(often used synonymously with school for dolphins,
and pod for whales).
Híndflipper - The rear flipper of a pinniped (Fig. 3).
Hybrid - The offspring resulting from a cross be-
tween 2 species.
Incisors - The front, cutting teeth between the ca-
nines (abbreviated I in dental formulas) (Fig. 5).
Jug handling - The posture used by most fur seals
of lying at the surface with fore- and hindflippers
curled into a loop.
rounded fin
triangular fin
underfur
guard hairs
brain
blowhole
sound origin
air sac
melon
blowhole
melon
sound 
waves
nasal
passage


10
Junk - The modified melon of sperm whales.
Marine Mammals of the World
Krill - A small shrimp-like crustacean that forms the
major food of many baleen whales.
Lair - A shelter under snow and/or ice, with an
opening to the water, used by some seals.
Lanugo - The birth coat of fur of a pinniped (some-
times shed in the uterus).
Lateral - Referring to the side of an animal.
Mandible - The lower jaw bone (Figs 5 and 7).
Mane - A region of long fur around the neck of some
male pinnipeds.
Occipital condyles - The rounded areas on the
occipital bone of the skull where the vertebral col-
umn attaches (Fig. 5).
Mass stranding - A stranding involving 3 or more
animals.
Maxilla - One of the 2 major bones of the upper jaw
(Fig. 5).
Melon - The fatty organ in the forehead of toothed
whales, believed to be used in echolocation (Fig. 9).
Mesopelagic - Associated with the middle layer of
the oceans (200 to 1 000 m depth) (Fig. 6).
Molars - The grinding teeth at the back of the jaw,
which grow only once in life (abbreviated M in dental
formulas) (Fig. 5).
Mollusk - A type of invertebrate, including clams,
squids, and octopuses.
Moult -The process of shedding the fur, or the skin
and the fur, to be replaced by a new set.
Monogamy - A social system in which individuals
have only 1 mate per breeding season.
Monotypic - A taxonomic group that has only 1
member.
Muzzle - The projecting part of the head, including
the mouth, nose, and jaws (Fig. 3).
Mysid - A shrimp-like invertebrate that is the food of
some marine mammals.
Mystacial area - The area around the vibrissae, or
whiskers, in pinnipeds and otters.
Nape - The area of the back of the neck on a
pinniped.
Nares (singular: naris) - The bony nasal openings
of the skull (Fig. 5).
Nasal bones - The small bones around the nasal
openings of the skull (Fig. 5).
Neonate - A newborn
Oceanic - The ocean region past the edge of the
continental shelf (generally deeper than 200 m)
(Fig. 6).
Palate - The roof of the mouth (Fig. 5).
Pantropical - Occurring globally around the tropics.
Parasite - An organism that obtains a benefit from
another organism while causing it harm.
Peduncle (caudal) - The laterally compressed re-
gion between the dorsal fin and tail flukes of ceta-
ceans and dugongs; a narrow tail stock (Fig. 3).
Pelage - Fur (Fig. 10).
Pelagic - Inhabiting the water column of the oceans
past the inter-tidal zone (Fig. 6).
Pinnae (ear) (singular: pinna) - The external ear
flaps (Fig. 3).
Photo-identification - The method of study of ma-
rine mammals using photographs to identify indi-
viduals.
Pod - A coordinated group of whales.
Polar - Relating to the regions near the poles.
Polygyny - A social system in which males have
more than 1 mate per breeding season.
Polynya - An area of open water in sea ice fields
coursed by currents.
Population - A biological population is a group of
interbreeding individuals of the same species, iso-
lated from other such groups.
Porpoising - The act of leaping out of the water
while moving forward at speed.
Post-anal hump or keel - A protruberance of con-
nective tissue just behind the anus of some cetace-
ans.
Post-canines - The set of all undifferentiated teeth
behind the canines in pinnipeds (abbreviated PC in
dental formulas) (Fig. 5).
Posterior - Referring to the rear (tail area) part of
an animal (Fig. 3).
Premaxilla - One of the 2 major bones of the upper
jaw, bering  the incisors in carnivores (Fig. 5).
Premolars - The set of bicuspid teeth in front of the
molars, which change from juveniles to adults (ab-
breviated PM in dental formulas) (Fig. 5).
Proboscis - A hanging enlargement of the nose.


Glossary 
11
Pup - A young pinniped or otter.
Rafting - The act of several individuals lying to-
gether at the surface.
Rookery - A terrestrial breeding area for pinnipeds.
Rostrum - Beak or snout. Also refers to the upper
jaw of the skull (Figs 3 and 5).
Saddle - A light patch behind the dorsal fin of  some
cetaceans.
Sagittal crest - A bony crest on the top of the skull
in some pinnipeds, often resulting  in an external
bump on the forehead (Fig. 5).
School - A coordinated group of cetaceans (often
used synonymously with herd for dolphins).
Sexual dimorphism - A difference in the appear-
ance of the sexes, generally with males larger than
females, often accompanied by differences in body
shape.
Spermaceti - The oil found in the spermaceti organ
of sperm whales.
Spinal blaze - A light streaking of color invading the
cape below the dorsal fin of some dolphins.
Spy-hop - The act of a whale bringing its head
vertically out of the water.
Standard length - Body length, measured from the
tip of the upper jaw to the notch in the fluke (straight
line) for cetaceans, and from the snout tip to the end
of the tail (straight line, belly up) for pinnipeds.
Sternum - The breastbone (Fig. 7).
Stock- A biological population, generally defined for
management purposes.
Stranding - The act of coming  on to land, either alive
or dead, intentional or accidental, of cetaceans or
sirenians.
Supraorbital processes  - Small bony protruber-
ances above the orbits on the skull (Fig. 5).
Symphysis (mandibular) - The coming together of
the 2 lower jaw bones (Fig. 5).
Tail stock - The region just ahead of the tail,  con-
necting it to the rest of the body (Fig. 3).
Taxonomy - The science of classification of organ-
isms using different groupings. From highest to
lowest level of organization the groupings of interest
to this guide (with examples for the bottlenose dol-
phin) are: Class (Mammalia), Order (Cetacea), Sub-
order (Odontoceti), Family (Delphinidae), Genus
(Tursiops) , and Species (Tursiops truncatus).
Telescoping - The migration, over the course of
evolutionary history, of the cetacean skull bones to
form their current configurations, resulting in the
placement of the nares on the top of the skull.
Temperate - Inhabiting the mid-latitudes charac-
terized by a mild, seasonally changing climate.
Thorax - The front or top region  of the body, behind
the head.
Throat grooves, creases or furrows - Short
grooves on the throat, characteristic of some  groups
of whales (Fig. 3).
Tropical - Inhabiting the low latitudes characterized
by a warm, seasonally stable climate.
Tympanic bullae - One of the 2 major innner ear
bones of mammals (Fig. 5).
Underfur - The short, numerous hairs underlying
the guard hairs of pinnipeds and otters (Fig. 10).
Urogential area - The region around the anal and
genital slits in cetaceans (Fig. ll).
FEMALE 
MALE
Fig. ll Ventral View of Cetacean
Ventral - Relating to the lower surface of an animal
(Fig. 3).
Ventral pleats - The long pleats extending from the
tip of the jaw to as far back as the navel in some
baleen whales (Fig. 3).
Vertebrae - The bones of the vertebral column,
consisting of 5 sections (cervical, thoracic, lumbar,
sacral, and caudal). Some  marine mammals do not
have true sacral vertebrae (Fig. 7).
Vestigial - Existing as a trace of something that is
in the process of being evolutionarily lost.
Vertex - The elevated portion of the skull immedi-
atley behind the bony nares (Fig. 5).
Vibrissae - Whiskers (Fig. 3).
Zygomatic arch - The bony arch of the cheekbone
in marine mammals (Fig. 5).
navel
genital
slits
anus
mammary
slits
urogenital
area
click for next page
