--- 
source: copy_2007 000n-1.pdf
--- 

CONTAMINATION OF THE EURASIAN OTTER (LUTRA LUTRA) BY  
ORGANOCHLORINATED PESTICIDES (OCPS) AND POLYCHLOROBIPHENYLS (PCBS) 
 
Nathalie TAPIE1, Hélène BUDZINSKI1, Paco BUSTAMANTE 2 & René ROSOUX 3 
 
1.  Laboratoire de Toxico-Chimie des Substances Naturelles, UMR 5472 CNRS, Université de Bordeaux I,  
F-33405 Talence Cedex, France 
2.  Laboratoire de Biologie et Environnement Marins, FRE 2727 du CNRS, Université de La Rochelle, 22, 
Avenue Michel Crépeau, F-17042 La Rochelle Cedex, France 
3.  Muséum des Sciences Naturelles, 6 rue Marcel Proust, F-45000 Orléans, France.  email:belrose@9online.fr 
 
 
The decline of the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) started at the beginning of the 20th Century and 
has evolved with the industrial development of the European countries.  Various reasons can 
explain this decline:  degradation of habitat and development of urban areas have reduced 
their vital living space;  pollution of the environment may also have an influence on otter 
population health, since this predator is situated at the top of the food chain.  Organic 
persistent pollutants (POPs) are therefore of particular concern because of their 
bioamplification throughout the food webs, as well as their effects on the immune and 
endocrine systems and on reproduction (MCKINNEY AND WALLER, 1994; AOKI, 2000).  The 
ban on certain persistent organochlorine pollutants, such as polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs), 
hexachlorobenzene (HCB), lindane (HCH) and DDT in several European countries has been 
beneficial to the environment.  However, POPs are resistant to degradation and therefore 
could remain hazardous over long periods of time. 
In France, only a few thousand otters remain (ROSOUX ET AL., 1996) and one of the 
main populations lives in the wetlands along the Atlantic coast (ROSOUX ET AL., 1996).  The 
aim of this study was to determine the levels of chlorinated POPs, i.e. the organochlorinated 
pesticides (OCPs: lindane, hexachlorobenzene (HCB), dichloro-diphenyl-trichloro-ethane or 
DDT, dichloro-diphenyl-dichloro-ethane or DDD, dichloro-diphenyl-dichloro-ethylene or 
DDE) and the polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs), in the organs and tissues (kidney, liver, brain, fat) 
of the Eurasian otter.  Tissue samples were collected from 30 specimens found dead, mainly 
road killed.  After extraction, samples were separated into two fractions by HPLC and then 
analysed by gas chromatography for OCPs and PCBs quantification.  In tissues, 
organochlorinated compounds accumulated mainly in fat, with 6000 ng.g-1 PCB dry weight 
(i.e. 10,000 ng.g-1 lipid) and 50 ng.g-1 OCPs dry weight (i.e. 80 ng.g-1 lipid) being recorded.  
Indeed, these compounds are highly lipophilic (5.5<log Kow<7) which allows them to 
accumulate in fatty tissues. Detoxification organs, i.e. liver and kidneys, exhibited much lower 
PCB levels (1500 and 1200 ng.g-1 dry weight, respectively).  However, when expressed in 
ng.g-1 lipid, PCBs levels were not significantly different (P>0.05) between fat, liver and 
kidney and reached around 10,000 ng.g-1 lipid weight.  The other organs exhibited eight times 
lower PCB levels. OCPs displayed a different body distribution, with the highest levels in 
liver and kidney (30 and 14 ng.g-1 dry weight or 300 and 140 ng.g-1 lipid, respectively).  
Levels of organochlorinated compounds were not significantly different (P>0.05) between 
males and females.  Similarly, no correlations were found between the otter contamination by 
OCPs and PCBs and their body condition.  Overall, the different samples show relatively low 
levels of contamination for both OCPs and PCBs compared to other areas in Europe (MASON 
AND RATFORD, 1994; MASON, 1998). 
 
The contamination of some of the otter’s typical prey, i.e. river mussel (Anodonta 
cygnea), Louisiana crayfish (Procambarus clarkii) and eel (Anguilla anguilla) was also 


determined in order to evaluate the exposure through diet.  Organochlorinated compounds are 
biomagnified between mussels and crayfishes (16 and 22 ng.g-1 PCBs dry weight or 1000 and 
460 ng.g-1 lipid, respectively), eels (126 ng PCBs.g-1 dry weight or 815 ng.g-1 lipid) and otters 
(liver level: 1,500 ng.g-1 PCBs dry weight or 11,500 ng.g-1 lipid).  Moreover, levels of low 
chlorinated OCPs compounds strongly decreased with the trophic level.  This modification of 
the molecular fingerprint is due to biotransformation processes along the food web, with a 
degradation of the low chlorinated compounds and a subsequent accumulation of the heavy 
chlorinated compounds. Similar observation can be made for PCBs when considering the ratio 
between CB 118 and CB 153.  Indeed, this ratio decreased along the food chain because of the 
preferential degradation of the 118 congener while the other is not or poorly modified.
 
Otters are therefore exposed to POPs through food and bioaccumulate such pollutants, 
even if use of these substances has been banned for a long time (1972 and 1987 for DDT and 
PCBs, respectively).  Although no correlation between condition index and POPs 
contamination has been found, effects of these pollutants are difficult to evaluate in wild 
animals although low doses of PCBs may affect the brain development, inducing behaviour 
disorders.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This study was supported financially by the SFEPM (Société Française pour l’Etude et la 
Protection des Mammifères), the DIREN Poitou-Charentes (Direction Régionale de 
l’Environnement), the Conseil Régional Poitou-Charentes and the MHNLR (Muséum 
d’Histoire Naturelle de La Rochelle). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
AOKI, Y. 2000. Polychlorinated biphenyls, polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, and polychlorinated 
dibenzofurans as endocrine disrupters – what we have learned from Yusho Disease. Environmental Research 
Section A, 86: 2-11. 
MASON, C.F. 1998. Decline in PCB levels in otters (Lutra lutra). Chemosphere, 36: 1969-1971. 
MASON, C.F. & RATFORD J.R. 1994. PCB congeners in tissues of European otter (Lutra lutra). Bulletin of 
Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 56: 548-554. 
MCKINNEY, J.D. & WALLER, C.L. 1994. Polychlorinated Biphenyls as hormonally active structural analogues.    
Environmental Health Perspectives, 102: 290-297. 
ROSOUX, R., TOURNEBIZE, T., MAURIN, H. & BOUCHARDY, C. 1996. Etude de la répartition de la loutre 
d'Europe (Lutra lutra L.) en France. In: La loutre et le vison d'Europe. Acts XVII Internationale Mammalogie 
Colloquium, Niort 23-25 Octobre 1993 (Edited by Gautier, J.Y., Libois, R. & Rosoux, R.)  Cahiers d'Ethologie, 
15: 195-205. 
