--- 
source: copy_2007 000n-2.pdf
--- 

THE IMPACT OF FISH AND STREAM MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES ON THE DIET 
OF OTTERS (LUTRA LUTRA) 
 
Kateřina POLEDNÍKOVÁ1*,
 Lukáš POLEDNÍK1, René MITRENGA2, & Bohumír LOJKÁSEK3 
 
 
1. Department für Integrative Biologie, Institut für Wildbiologie und Jagdwirtschaft, Universität für Bodenkultur 
Wien, Peter-Jordan-Str. 76 1190 Wien, Austria.   email: polednici@centrum.cz 
2.  Department of Ecology, Faculty of Science, Palacky University Olomouc, tř. Svobody 26, 771 46 Olomouc, 
Czech Republic 
3. Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 30. dubna 22, 701 03 Ostrava, 
Czech Republic 
* Correspondence address: Stoječín 21, 378 81 Slavonice, Czech Republic 
 
Keywords:  Eurasian otter, Lutra lutra, food availability, trout streams, spraint analysis, electro-fishing, 
Beskydy Mountains 
 
 
1   INTRODUCTION 
 
Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) have been blamed for considerable losses of commercial fish 
stocks in different habitats, including trout streams.  This paper presents results from the 
Beskydy Mountains (north east Czech Republic) on the diet of otters, as determined by 
spraint (faeces) analysis, and compares this with the availability of fish as affected by 
differing forms of river management.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Location of the study area within the territory of the Czech Republic. Shaded area – otter distribution 
in the Czech Republic (after Kučerová et al. 2001, modified) 
 
The Beskydy Mountains form the outer part of the Western Carpathian Range (Figure 
1). The streams have a mountainous character with a stony and gravely substrate and 
alternating riffles and pools.  The banks are partially improved and the widths vary between 
two to ten metres.  Several artificial gradient drops (weirs) 30-600 centimetres high interrupt 
the course of the streams, thereby constituting migration barriers for fish. The streams studied 
differ in angling and stream management (Table 1).   
 


 
 
 
Table 1  Angling and stream management of three studied streams. 
 
 
Hluchová Stream 
Lomná Stream 
Kopytná Stream 
Angling management 
Yes 
yes 
no, since 1997 
Stocking level (brown trout)
650 ind./ha 
400 ind./ha 
0 
Catch 
25-125 ind./ha (5-25 kg/ha) 
0 
Migration barriers in 
downstream part 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
 
 
2   METHODS 
 
Fresh spraints were collected for diet analysis from the banks of the three study localities at 
one-monthly intervals between May 2000 and May 2002.  The diet composition is presented 
as relative frequency of occurrence and frequency of occurrence (ERLINGE, 1967).   For 
comparison of diet and fish availability, only those spraint samples, which were collected six 
weeks before and six weeks after electro-fishing, were used in the analyses.  
Each stretch was electro-fished twice on any one occasion, following the standard 
procedure and the biomass and abundance of fish were estimated (SEBER AND LECREN, 1967).  
The data on fish abundance and biomass on the Lomná stream were obtained from HARTVICH 
(1997). 
 
 
3   RESULTS 
 
During the two years of the study, 894 spraints were collected and 17 prey items were 
identified (Table 2). A comparison of the main prey categories revealed significant 
differences in the diet at all three streams (Figure 2). Brown trout (Salmo trutta) was the most 
important prey at the Hluchová stream, whilst sculpin (Cottus poecilopus) was the most 
important prey species at the Lomná and Kopytná streams.  Amphibians were the third most 
important prey category at all three streams.  
 
Table 2. Overall diet of otters at different streams; FO – frequency of occurrence, RFO  - relative frequency of 
occurrence. All results above 5 % marked in bold. 
 
 
Kopytná 
 
Hluchová 
 
Lomná 
 
FO 
RFO 
FO 
RFO 
 
FO 
RFO 
Salmonidae 
57.4 
21.5 
72.1 
30.6 
 60.3
27.5 
Thymallus. thymallus 
12.5 
4.7 
2.5 
1.1 
 
0.8 
0.3 
Gobio gobio 
2.2 
0.8 
1.4 
0.6 
 
- 
- 
Leuciscus sp. 
1.5 
0.6 
1.7 
0.7 
 
0.3 
0.1 
Chondrostoma nasus 
0.7 
0.3 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Phoxinus phoxinus 
14.0 
5.2 
0.6 
0.2 
 
- 
- 
Rutilus rutilus 
1.5 
0.6 
1.4 
0.6 
 
- 
- 
Tinca tinca 
- 
- 
0.6 
0.2 
 
- 
- 
Other Cyprinidae 
4.4 
1.7 
4.5 
1.9 
 
1.5 
0.7 
Barbatula barbatula 
33.8 
12.7 
7.5 
3.2 
 
1.0 
0.5 
Cottus poecilopus 
72.1 
27.0 
48.6 
20.6 
 90.0
41.1 
Unidentified fish 
- 
- 
1.1 
0.5 
 
- 
- 
Mammalia 
1.5 
0.6 
1.1 
0.5 
 
2.3 
1.0 
Aves 
- 
- 
0.3 
0.1 
 
- 
- 
Reptilia 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
1.3 
0.6 
Anura 
46.3 
17.4 
70.7 
30.0 
 33.8
15.4 
Invertebrata 
19.1 
7.1 
21.5 
9.1 
 27.8
12.7 
 


 
 
 
The most diverse fish composition was found at the Kopytná stream, whereas at the 
Hluchová and Lomná streams only two fish species occurred.  A comparison of fish 
composition between the Hluchová and Lomná streams revealed significant differences 
between both streams (G = 8.7, df = 1, P < 0.01).  Brown trout constituted a higher proportion 
of the total fish abundance at Hluchová stream than at Lomná.  
A positive correlation between the frequency of occurrence of fish species in spraints 
and biomass of fish species in the stream was found at Kopytná in autumn 2000 (rs = 0.93, df 
= 7, P < 0.05), and at the Hluchová stream in spring 2000 (rs = 1, df = 6, P < 0.01) and 
autumn 2001 (rs = 0.74, df = 9, P < 0.05). No correlation was found at the Hluchová stream in 
spring 2001.  
The contribution of the main fish species in the diet, together with fish availability at 
the different streams, is shown in Figures 2 and 3. 
 
 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Kopytná
Hluchová
Lomná
T. thymallus
P. phoxinus
B. barbatula
C. poecilpus
S. trutta
 
 
Figure 2. The main fish species in the diet 
 
 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Kopytná
Hluchová
Lomná
T. thymallus
P. phoxinus
B. barbatula
C. poecilpus
S. trutta
 
 
Figure 3. Fish availability at different streams 
 


 
 
 
4 DISCUSSION 
 
Despite the broad similarity of the streams, both in general appearance and main features, 
otter diet composition varied significantly. This may be explained by differences in their fish 
abundance, diversity, and biomass.  In all three streams, the diet of otters tended to reflect 
these differences, with fish species in the diet occurring in relative proportion to their 
availability.  
No angling management together with an absence of migration barriers in the lower 
stretch of the Kopytná stream resulted in a more ‘natural’ fish community (Figure 3), with 
free migration of especially smaller species.  
The regular stocking of high densities of brown trout in the Hluchová and Lomná 
streams imposes a high predation pressure on small fish species, causing local depletion of 
their populations and, consequently, a relative increase in the availability of trout.  Due to the 
barriers downstream, no immigration of new individuals from the River Olše is possible and 
the populations are driven close to extinction.  Thus the fish community in these two streams 
is composed almost entirely of brown trout and sculpin (Figure 3; HARTVICH, 1997). The 
wider diversity of slower prey (sculpin, stone loach) at the Kopytná, and the lack of 
downstream migration barriers, allowing free movement of trout in and out of the river may, 
conversely reduce such predation and allow trout populations to grow.  
There is evidence; therefore, that angling management, consisting of the stocking of 
high densities of brown trout, together with habitat fragmentation, affects non-target fish 
species.  Such management decreases the overall availability of these fish species in streams 
and forces otters to feed mostly on commercial fish species.  A change in fish management 
practices including the protection or restocking of non-target species, habitat restoration (e.g. 
fish passes), could increase the local populations of non-target species.  Such additional food 
may result in a reduction of otter predation on commercial fish, resulting in a decrease in 
economic damage and the resulting conflicts. 
 
 
5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The study was financed by the Czech Grant Agency (206/00/0824), the Czech Otter 
Foundation Fund and Grant Agency of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic 
(A6093105). 
 
 
6   REFERENCES 
 
ERLINGE, S.1967. Food habits of the fish-otter (Lutra lutra L.) in south Swedish habitats. Viltrevy, 4: 371-443. 
HARTWICH P. 1997. Ochrana ichtyofauny a možnosti revitalizace upraveného toku Lomné. Report for the 
Beskydy Protected Landscape Area [in Czech] 
KUČEROVÁ, M., ROCHE, K. & TOMAN, A. 2001. Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) distribution in the Czech Republic. 
Vydra, 11: 37-39. (in Czech, with English summary) 
SEBER, F. & LECREN, E.D. 1967. Estimating population parameters from large catches relative to the 
population.  Journal of Animal Ecology, 36: 631-642. 
 
 
 
 
 
