--- 
source: copy_t0725e13.pdf
--- 

82
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Cuvier’s beaked whale: Fr - Ziphius; Sp - Zifio de Cuvier.
Fig. 217 Ziphius cavirostris
Distinctive Characteristics: Cuvier’s beaked
whales are relatively robust, as beaked whales go.
They have a short, poorly defined beak, and a
mouthline that is upcurved at the rear. A pair of
V-shaped throat grooves is present. A diagnostic
feature is the slight concavity on the top of the
head, which becomes increasingly more notice-
able in older animals. A fluke notch is sometimes
present. The dorsal fin is small and falcate, and
is set about two-thirds of the way back from the
snout 
tip.
The body is dark grey to light rusty brown, with
lighter areas around the head and belly. The head
and much of the back of adult males can be
completely white. Generally, adults are covered
with light scratches and circular marks.
There is a single pair of forward-pointing conical
teeth at the tip of the lower jaw; they generally
erupt only in adult males and are exposed outside
the closed mouth in large bulls.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 218 Skull
Ziphius cavirostris Cuvier, 1823
ZIPH Ziph 1         BCW
click for previous page


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae
83
Can be confused with: This species is most likely to be confused with other beaked whales, especially
species of Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90). The robust body, blunt head, and lighter coloration (especially
around the head, and in adult males) may be sufficient to distinguish Cuvier’s beaked whales, if seen. Whales
of the genera Hyperoodon (starting on p. 84) and Berardius (starting on p. 78) are larger and have more
bulbous foreheads and long tube-like snouts.
Size: Length at birth is about 2.7 m; adults reach 7.5 m (males) and 7 m (females). Maximum recorded
weight is nearly 3 000 kg.
Geographical Distribution: Cuvier’s beaked whales are widely distributed in offshore waters of all oceans,
from the tropics to the polar regions. They may have the most extensive range of any beaked whale species,
and are fairly common in certain areas, such as the eastern tropical Pacific.
Fig. 219
Biology and Behaviour: This species tends to be rather inconspicuous in its behaviour. Dives of up to 40
minutes have been documented. Cuvier’s beaked whales are found mostly in small groups of 2 to 7, but are
not uncommonly seen alone.
Seasonality of calving is not known in this species.
Cuvier’s beaked whales, like all beaked whales, appear to prefer deep water; they feed mostly on deep sea
squid, but also take fish and some crustaceans.
Exploitation: There have been no major fisheries for this species, although small numbers have been taken
deliberately in Japan, the Lesser Antilles, and the Mediterranean, and incidentally elsewhere.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.


84 
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Northern bottlenose whale; Fr - Hyperoodon boreal; Sp - Ballena nariz de botella del
norte.
Fig. 220 Hyperoodon ampullatus
Distinctive Characteristics: Northern bot-
tlenose whales are appropriately named; they
have a long tube-like snout that is distinct from the
melon. In young animals and females, the fore-
head slopes gently upward from the beak, but in
adult males the forehead becomes very steep and
bulging, with a squarish profile. A pair of forward-
pointing grooves is found on the throat. The small
dorsal fin is falcate and is located far back on the
body. The flippers are small and blunt at the tips,
and the flukes generally lack a median notch.
Calves are apparently either black or brownish in
colour. There is some disagreement as to whether
young animals are countershaded. Adults are
dark greyish to chocolate brown above and some-
what lighter below. The brownish tinge is en-
hanced by a covering of diatoms. Some
individuals are mottled with white to yellowish
splotches and scars, which increase in number
with age. Much of the melon and face may be light
grey, or in adult males nearly white.
At the tip of the lower jaw are 2 conical teeth that
erupt only in bulls, and are not visible outside the
closed mouth. A second pair of teeth is sometimes
buried in the gums behind the first, and 10 to 20
additional vestigial teeth may be found in the gums
of both upper and lower jaws.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW 
Fig. 221 Skull
Hyperoodon ampullatus (Forster, 1770)
ZIPH Hyp 2         BOW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae 
85
Can be confused with: Cuvier’s beaked whales (p. 82) can be distinguished from bottlenose whales by
differences in head shape and body colour. Species of the genus Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90) are
distinguishable by their smaller size and more cone-shaped head.
Size: Adult females are up to 8.7 m and adult males up to 9.8 m in length. At birth calves are about 3.5 m.
Geographical Distribution: Northern bottlenose whales are found only in the North Atlantic, from New
England to Baffin Island and southern Greenland in the west and from the Strait of Gibraltar to Svalbard in
the east. These cold temperate to subarctic whales are found in deep waters, mostly seaward of the
continental slope.
Biology and Behaviour: Most pods contain at least 4 whales, sometimes with as many as 20, and there is
some segregation by age and sex. These deep-divers can remain submerged an hour, possibly as long as
2. They are known for their habit of “standing by” injured companions, which permitted whalers to kill large
numbers of whales at the same site. Bottlenose whales are also often curious and attracted to stationary
vessels.
Northern bottlenose whales have a peak in calving in April.
Although primarily adapted to feeding on squid, these whales also eat fish, sea cucumbers, starfish, and
prawns. They apparently do much of their feeding on or near the bottom.
Exploitation: Northern bottlenose whales have traditionally been the most heavily hunted of the beaked
whales. Some hunting has been done by the British and Canadians, but by far the major bottlenose whaling
nation was Norway. Early on, they were hunted primarily for oil, but later mainly for animal feed. No hunting
has been conducted by Norway since 1973.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 222
click for next page
