--- 
source: E479CB64-ACA3-4F45-B7AD-01FF26CDE13A.pdf
--- 

Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 1 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in 
Montana Using GIS
Richard Walker and Lance Craighead
Abstract
We delineated landscape routes offering the best chance of success for wildlife moving among the three large 
core protected areas in the Northern Rockies -- the Salmon-Selway, Northern Continental Divide, and 
Greater Yellowstone Ecosystems. Using ARC/GRID and Montana Gap Analysis data, we derived habitat 
suitability models for three umbrella species, which we combined with road density information to create 
kilometer-scale cost surfaces of movement. For each of the three species -- grizzly bear, elk, and cougar -- 
we performed a leastcostpath analysis to locate broad potential corridor routes. From this first 
approximation we identified probable movement routes and as well as critical barriers, bottlenecks, and 
filters where corridor routes intersected with highrisk habitat. This analysis is being used to identify priority 
areas for wildlife management to improve the connectivity between the core protected ecosystems in the 
Northern Rockies. 
Introduction
Habitat reduction and fragmentation at a variety of spatial scales has been widely acknowledged as a 
primary cause of the decline of many species worldwide (Ehrlich 1986, Lovejoy et al. 1986, Harris 1984). 
Habitat fragmentation generally leads to smaller and more isolated animal populations. Smaller populations 
are then more vulnerable to local extinction, due to stochastic events (Shaffer 1978, Gilpin and Soule 1986), 
and they are more susceptible to the negative effects of inbreeding depression. To reduce the isolation of 
habitat fragments, many conservation biologists (e.g. Noss 1983, 1987, Noss and Harris 1986, Craighead 
et al. 1997, Craighead and Vyse 1995, Paetkau et. al. 1997) have recommended maintaining landscape 
"connectivity" -- preserving habitat for movement of species between remaining fragments. 
While a significant body of research has demonstrated the deleterious effects of habitat fragmentation, work 
examining critical thresholds of habitat connectivity has lagged behind. For several species, Population 
Viability Analysis (PVA) has been employed to estimate minimum viable populations as well as the amount 
of habitat necessary to support a minimum viable population (MVP) (Shaffer 1978, 1981, 1987, Gilpin and 
Soule 1986). Yet few similar analyses have been done explicitly to demonstrate minimum thresholds of 
connectivity for adequate protection of species. The scientific debate over the efficacy or even necessity of 
species corridors is a reflection of this problem (Simberloff and Abele 1976, Simberloff et al. 1992). 
However, since habitat fragmentation has been shown to contribute to population declines, by inference 
some degree of "lack of fragmentation", or habitat connectivity, should help ensure long-term species survival 
(Noss 1987, 1992, Beier 1993, Noss et al. 1996). 
At regional scales, connecting large core areas of wildlife habitat requires corridors -- land managed for its 
function as routes for wildlife movement and dispersal (Saunders and Hobbs 1991). The notion of 
connective habitat corridors implies a system of corridors and the core areas of habitat which they serve to 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 2 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
link. Conceptual models of core areas, movement corridors and buffer zones have been proposed by several 
workers (Soule, Noss 1992, Noss and Harris 1996) as frameworks for long-term regional scale 
conservation of wildlife. The Ninth U.S. Circuit Court Of Appeals (1990) provided a reasonable definition 
of a corridor: 
 "...avenues along which wide-ranging animals can travel, 
plants can propagate, genetic interchange can occur, 
populations can move in response to environmental changes 
and natural disasters, and threatened 
species can be replenished from other areas."
Presently, corridor or connectivity analysis has been mandated in the Upper Columbia River Basin 
Integrated Scientific Assessment (Quigley et al. 1996), in the U.S. Forest Service conservation strategy for 
Western forest carnivores (Ruggiero et al. 1994), and in the Interagency Grizzly Bear Recovery Plan 
(USFWS 1993). Corridor analysis is a logical tool for compliance with the letter and spirit of the National 
Forest Management Act of 1976, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and the National Environmental 
Policy Act of 1972. Wildlife movement corridors have been mentioned or broadly outlined in Environmental 
Assessments such as Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks conservation easements for the 
Sieben Ranch (MDFWP 1996) and Lewis and Clark National Forest Oil and Gas Leasing documents 
(USDA 1996). Despite this recent acknowledgment of the importance of linkage zones, the only guidelines 
so far provided by government agencies is a list of 8 types of information layers to be used in a GIS for 
linkage zone assessment, described in the grizzly bear recovery plan. A 5-year process of regional-scale 
linkage assessment for grizzly bear populations in the lower 48 states is currently underway (USFWS 1993). 
In order to contribute to defining a scientific framework for linkage zone assessment (or corridor analysis) 
we report an independent effort to delineate wildlife corridors according to the conservation biology model 
(cores, corridors, buffers) at regional scale in a specific geographic area. Using Geographic Information 
System (GIS) software, the best available spatial data on habitats, and considering the habitat preferences of 
3 select umbrella species, we have modeled potential regional-scale wildlife corridors between core 
protected areas in the Northern Rockies of the United States. Our approach offers a biologically defensible 
assessment of probable corridor routes and suggests one means (least-cost) of estimating the relative 
"connectivity" of alternate routes. A flowchart of the process we follow looks like this: 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 3 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
where rectangles represent data sources and products, and ovals represent processes or techniques. 
Green items were available at the beginning of the project, Yellow items are the subject of this paper, and 
Red items are further refinements of the analysis and implementation steps necessary to protect corridor 
habitat. 
Background
The Northern Rockies of the United States, comprised primarily of western Montana, central and northern 
Idaho and northwestern Wyoming, harbor some of the last vestiges of North America¹s great biological 
heritage. Here are the last remaining populations of grizzly bears and free-ranging bison. In several areas, the 
full complement of large native predators present at the arrival of Columbus in the New World still persists. 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 4 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
 
With increasing human development, however, wildlife habitat in the region is becoming ever more 
fragmented. New roads, housing developments, and natural resource extraction activities have caused major 
changes in the natural landscapes over the past few decades, and in the process have removed or isolated 
areas of habitat formerly available to wildlife. Projections are for this trend of habitat fragmentation to 
continue and accelerate, as the Northern Rockies is one of the fastest growing regions in the country 
(Quigley et al. 1996). 
One result of the regional scale fragmentation in the Northern Rockies is the current situation of the grizzly 
bear, which is now isolated in a handful of remnant disjunct populations. The bear populations are centered 
in large, relatively undeveloped and undisturbed areas including the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, the 
Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem and, to a much lesser degree, in the mountains of northern Idaho 
and northwest Montana (USFWS 1993). A process has been initiated to restore the grizzly to the Salmon 
Selway area in central Idaho (USFWS 1996). 
The grizzly bear is a sensitive regional indicator of fragmentation and the effects of human development. It is 
considered an "umbrella species" -- a species whose proper long-term management would likely help to 
ensure the persistence of many other species which also occur in the ecosystem. Because they require large 
areas of relatively undisturbed habitat, solving for the habitat requirements of grizzlies can assist in defining 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 5 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
large core protected areas, and smaller protected areas to serve as nodes in a networked regional landscape 
habitat system. 
Cougars, which are widespread in the Northern Rockies, have fairly well-defined habitat requirements, 
including forest cover, forest edge and prey. Conserving habitat for the regional movements of cougars, 
much as for the grizzly bear, would also likely provide protection for other mammals moving through a 
landscape. In addition, we also examined and modeled the habitat needs of elk for dispersal. Protecting 
adequate corridors for these three species -- a large carnivore, a large omnivore and a large ungulate -- is 
also likely to provide a protective umbrella for a number of other smaller inhabitants of the region. The 
following discussion is in the general context of these three umbrella species. 
Dispersal behavior
Dispersal patterns of subadult animals as they reach sexual maturity are an important factor determining gene 
flow, population genetic structure, and ultimately genetic diversity in populations. Animals dispersing from 
"source" populations can be recruited into declining or "sink" populations to maintain demographic stability. 
In theory, any animal in a population can disperse away from its original home range. Research, however, 
has shown a tendency for most dispersing animals to fit a more limited profile. In mammals, the general 
pattern of dispersal seems to be that males are more mobile, while females remain nearer to their natal areas 
(Greenwood 1980). Understanding the behavioral characteristics of those animals most likely to disperse 
can assist in determining criteria for assessing the best routes for corridor habitat protection, since these 
animals are also the most likely to use and benefit from corridors. 
In the case of large predators such as grizzly bears and cougars, the most typical dispersing animal is a 
juvenile male. Maternal females will not tolerate the presence of their juvenile male offspring in their home 
ranges, and thus force them away at a certain age. In many cases, the surrounding habitat is occupied by 
older, more dominant males. Thus a banished juvenile male often has no choice but to disperse to a different 
area as yet unknown to him, and search for adequate prey and cover, and a territory he can occupy. It is 
generally hypothesized that dispersing animals will occupy the first unoccupied habitat they encounter (Waser 
1985). However, there are instances where dispersers are tolerated within adult home ranges (McCord 
1974), and other instances where dispersers travel long distances (sometimes returning later) even though 
suitable habitat appeared to be found nearby (Craighead 1994). 
Dispersing animals are typically young and relatively inexperienced. In addition, they are moving through 
unfamiliar landscapes, which can lead to some random exploratory behavior and less predictable patterns of 
movement. As they wander through terra incognita, they may tend to avoid certain phenomena and be 
attracted to others, and can be influenced by factors such as scent and wind direction that are not obvious to 
humans. To some degree, their movements may be indistinguishable from random. 
For our purposes, delineating corridors at regional scale entailed determining which routes, based upon the 
observed needs of wildlife, offer an animal the best chance of survival if it were to disperse between core 
protected areas. In this effort we have attempted to balance two general factors affecting wildlife movements: 
the most suitable connected habitat (in the absence of humans) and the degree to which human-related 
impediments are present in the landscape. 
We do not make the claim that these routes are most the likely to be used by dispersing individuals. Due to 
highly variable individual behavior this would be very a tenuous assumption. Rather, our analyses indicate 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 6 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
that other routes, while perhaps equally likely to be taken by an individual, would reduce his/her probability 
of survival in the process of dispersing from one core protected area to another, generally because of 
increased transit time and risk of encountering significant impediments. 
Thus the route delineations from our analyses are more "prescriptive" rather than strictly "descriptive". The 
objective of protecting such corridors would be to leave the best routes open to wildlife, but without implying 
any mechanism of forcing animals to choose those routes (other than the fact that increasing development 
and change outside of potential corridors will continually make those areas more and more hostile to most 
wildlife species). 
Methods
Model Assumptions
Wildlife respond to landscapes (and habitat) at several scales. Foraging and hunting activities, for example, 
can be geared to microsite occurrences of vegetation or prey (for example see Apps 1996). We assumed 
that dispersing animals are less sensitive to local environments, and respond to a larger landscape in their 
movements. For modeling best regional scale corridor routes we made the following assumptions. 
Assumption 1) Good corridors are comprised primarily of preferred habitat types 
Many sorts of habitats can allow for wildlife movement, even those which are not generally preferred. In one 
sense, large open areas can facilitate movement, in that the terrain offers few impediments to transit. On the 
other hand, many species avoid open areas lacking adequate vegetation cover for concealment. While it is 
possible that "good transiting habitat" is not necessarily the same as habitat preferred for most other functions 
(e.g. hunting, grazing, bedding, etc.), in our work we assumed that corridors should be comprised primarily 
of generally preferred habitat types. Such habitat offers a greater probability of at least short-term survival 
for an animal, given that it is more likely to be able to find adequate food and shelter therein. However, 
species such as those we model could pass through unsuitable habitat for one to several days without 
significant harm. 
Assumption 2) Humans pose problems for successful transit
In human-dominated landscapes, particularly during hunting season, wildlife species learn to either avoid 
humans and developments, or they learn to associate humans with sources of food. The problems humans 
pose for transiting wildlife can be broken down into two types. 
First, their dwellings can attract dispersing individuals, through easy access to food (e.g. pet food on the 
porch, poultry feed, garbage). Inexperienced animals can easily become habituated to humans, and cause 
increasing problems. Habituated individuals are more likely to be killed or transported to some remote 
locale, thus terminating their dispersal through that area. 
Secondly, in many areas human activities can repel these "wary" transiting individuals, by loud machine noise 
or other high profile activities. They can often displace wildlife from important habitat and force them to use 
other, less-valuable habitat. It can also effectively restrict their moving to otherwise available habitat in 
nearby areas, reducing the chances of survival for the individual and ultimately the population. 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 7 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
People also have a general tendency, when encountering large predators, to kill them directly. Because of the 
problems many species encounter with humans, optimal corridor routes should avoid human developments 
and activities as much as possible. 
Assumption 3) Current human developments are permanent
Closing or destroying some key human developments could greatly change the value of particular corridor 
route. However, for this initial analysis we assumed that all developments, including roads, are permanent. 
Subsequent analyses may include alternate scenarios -- i.e. what effect overall corridor ratings would result 
from closing roads or altering land management practices. 
Assumption 4) Least-cost path
We assumed that the least-cost path, based upon the previous assumptions, offers an animal the greatest 
probability of survival in traversing the entire distance. This was facilitated by ARC/INFO GRID functions 
costdistance and corridor, but it also has a significant degree of biological relevance. Although a dispersing 
animal may not choose the least-cost (optimum) path, if it did it would encounter fewer hazards or obstacles, 
would spend less time in traveling, and would travel through habitat with higher probability of containing food 
and concealment cover, thus increasing its probability of survival. The least-cost path balances habitat 
suitability, minimum euclidean distance and degree of "connectivity" between the two endpoints. 
GIS Model inputs
We developed three input GIS coverages to model best potential corridor routes: 1) habitat quality (per 
species per vegetation type); 2) amount (length) of forest and shrub/grassland interface; and 3) road density. 
The first two are measures of the quality of an area in terms of its utility to a species, while the third is a good 
indicator of the amount of human use and disturbance in the area. These measures are similar to the 
parameters developed for the computer-based Cumulative Effects Model for the Grizzly Bear, by 
researchers with the Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee (Systems for Environmental Management, 1994), 
and others. 
Habitat quality
The Montana Gap Analysis project recently produced detailed GIS coverages of dominant vegetation cover 
for most of western Montana and central and northern Idaho. Several gap analysis coverages relate to 
vegetation cover. For our habitat quality model we used a raster (cell) version of the gap analysis vegetation 
cover types. This file maps more than 50 different cover types, including some which were not native 
vegetation (e.g. barren, agriculture). Based upon an extensive review of the literature, we then rated each 
vegetation type according to its quality for grizzly bear, cougar and elk. Rating values ranged from 0 
(unsuitable) to 3 (highly preferred) for each species. 
Habitat quality, however, is not strictly a function of the presence of preferred types. The spatial pattern of 
type mixtures can enhance or detract from the overall habitat quality. Grizzly bears, cougar and elk are 
known to prefer a mixture of cover (for security) and open areas (for food or prey) over singular forest or 
grassland types. To indicate this "metatype" quality of habitat mixes, we derived the length of forest/grassland 
and forest/shrubland boundaries for the Gap analysis region. 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 8 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
Roads data
As a measure of human development and use, we at first used the predicted road density coverage of the 
Interior Columbia Basin Ecosystem Management Project (ICBEMP), which covers most of the region. After 
working with the coverage, however, many errors and inaccuracies became obvious. The data were clearly 
of insufficient quality to use in the analyses. Instead, we extracted roads information from two digital sources 
-- U.S. Census Bureau TIGER files and U.S. Forest Service Cartographic Feature files. While some 
inconsistencies in the source files were evident, overall the quality of the data were high. (The 1:100K scale 
USGS Digital Line Graph data was of similar quality to the TIGER files, but were more problematical to 
use). 
Not all roads have equal impact on wildlife and the landscape. We thus weighted the roads according to 
their estimated use. In the TIGER files, all major highways were given a weight of 3, other major roads a 
weight of 2, and all other roads and railroads a weight of unity. The weights are roughly proportional to 
amount of disturbance or degree of difficulty an animal might have in attempting to cross the road. 
Integrating landscape variables at regional scale
A central question in modeling wildlife habitat and corridors is determining the best scale, or set of scales, at 
which to perform the analyses. Many ecological studies demonstrate that animals learn and "map" their home 
range areas and know where food, cover and other requirements are located on a "micro-scale" that can 
often be measured at a scale as fine as square meters. However, animals such as elk, cougar and grizzly bear 
regularly move over long distances through habitat that is not of any particular value to them in order to reach 
areas they prefer. In addition, dispersing individuals may wander for days through poor habitat before 
encountering better habitat where they can find food. 
For regional scale corridor routes, estimating habitat variables at the scale of 30 meters (the resolution of 
Landsat Thematic Mapper and Montana Gap Analysis) cannot be supported by the level of detail of the 
data. A model using data of such fine scale would be highly sensitive to local small changes in suitability 
rating, and may be unrealistic in its results. Thus, to examine possible regional-scale movement routes, given 
the limitations of GIS data and habitat characterization, we integrated habitat quality and roads data over 
larger areas. The choice of area unit size was critical -- too coarse a scale could obscure important variations 
in suitability of the landscape for a wildlife corridor. 
For this analysis we integrated the landscape (and habitat) variables at a resolution of one square kilometer. 
This scale offered a reasonable balance between the fine scaled information base (30m in the case of habitat 
data, continuous in the case of roads data) and a broader scale unit (e.g. a small watershed). Ignoring the 
filtering effect of the 2.5 hectare minimum mapping unit of the Montana Gap Analysis database, integrating 
the habitat value coverage involved averaging approximately 1110 30m cells per square kilometer. The 
reasoning behind the selection of square kilometer integrations is further elaborated upon in the following 
discussion. 
UTM-based square kilometer integrations
The information from Gap Analysis were derived from 30 meter cells, which had been generalized into 
minimum patch sizes (mapping units) of 5 acres (2 hectares). To provide a spatial integration of the 30m 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 9 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
cells, we generated a square kilometer grid overlay based upon the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) 
coordinate system. . The square kilometer cells conform to 1000m increments in the regional UTM zone (i.e. 
each cell is bounded by whole kilometers in projected coordinates). 
We selected the UTM square kilometer cell integration for several reasons. First, it provided a filter of the 
landscape in line with a characteristic scale of larger wildlife sensory perception, on order of a 500m radius 
(this is, of necessity, a generalization -- scents and sounds can easily carry for several kilometers). Second, it 
offered convenience in the field, as UTM grids overlay all recently revised USGS 1:24000 series maps. 
Third, global positioning system (GPS) units conventionally display ground coordinates in the UTM system. 
Had we employed an arbitrary set of integrating cells of the same kilometer resolution, the our ability to 
assess the accuracy of our work would have been compromised, as it would have been much more difficult 
to assess the limits (and thus accuracy) of such cells in the field. 
Based upon the literature and expert opinion, we derived mean habitat quality values for each UTM-based 
square kilometer cell for grizzly bear, cougar and elk. The mean values varied from 0 to 3. For each cell we 
also derived the total length of forest/shrubland edge and forest/grassland interface. These values ranged 
from 0 to about 11 kilometers per square kilometer. Though they are not strictly independent, the habitat 
value and edge length coverages provided us with two measures of the suitability of each square kilometer 
for these species. 
Road density was obtained in a similar manner to the forest edge coverage. Roads were assigned weightings 
according to their approximated traffic load, then the weighted length totals were derived for each UTM cell. 
The range of the cells was very wide -- from 0km/km2 in roadless and wilderness areas to nearly 20km/km2 
in highly urbanized areas. 
Synthesizing the input parameters
For each of the three species, the three landscape variables (habitat quality, forest edge and road density) 
required synthesis into a single coverage layer. This matrix represented a model landscape "surface" offering 
varying degrees of resistance to movement per species per cell. The higher the resistance or "cost" 
associated with crossing the cell, given the context of its surrounding cells, the less important or suitable the 
cell was apt to be as part of a corridor. 
Combining the three variables to derive overall habitat suitability required some notions of the relative 
importance of the factors and the way in which they interrelate. As a springboard for our modeling, we used 
both the relative ranges of the variables and a functional form similar to that of the Cumulative Effects Model 
developed for the grizzly bear (SEM, 1994). In that still-evolving model, the "vegetation coefficient" (i.e. our 
habitat value) and "disturbance coefficient" (analogous to our road density parameter) varied between 0 and 
1, while the "edge coefficient" (i.e. edge length) and "supplemental coefficient" were normalized to values 
between 0 and 2. The general form of the (atemporal) CEM ultimately computes habitat effectiveness 
parameter via the following: 
Habitat Value = (vegetation coefficient) * (edge coefficient) * (supplemental coefficient) * (disturbance 
coefficient) 
Our model resembled the form of the CEM, but produced a value inversely proportional to the suitability of 
the cell for a corridor. Specifically, it had the following form: 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 10 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
Cell Resistance = -1.0 * ((habitat coefficient) * (edge coefficient)) + (road density coefficient) 
For the edge and the road density coefficients, we took log transforms of the original values (units of 
km/km2), then normalized them to the desired maximum values. This reduced the sensitivity of the model to 
extreme values of road density and edges, and increased the sensitivity to changes in the lower ranged 
values. 
The habitat value and edge coefficients clearly interact and are not entirely independent measures. Thus we 
multiplied these two terms together. The road density was independent of the other factors, thus we added it 
to the other terms. 
For elk and grizzly bear we used the above form of the model. For cougar modeling, since little is reported in 
the literature on road/human sensitivity, we omitted the road density coefficients from the calculations. 
Results
Using ARC/INFO GRID functions costdistance and corridor, with our species-specific movement "cost 
surfaces" as inputs, we created symmetrical cumulative cost surfaces with pairs of core protected areas of 
the Northern Rockies as origins/destinations. For the core areas we took units managed specifically for 
wilderness on public lands which were contiguous within an ecosystem. The Salmon-Selway Ecosystem core 
area was comprised of all contiguous wilderness areas in central Idaho, including the Gospel Hump, Selway-
Bitterroot and Frank Church/River of No Return wilderness areas. For the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, 
Yellowstone National Park and all National Forest Wilderness Areas contiguous with the park were used. 
The Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem was comprised of Glacier National Park and the Bob Marshall 
wilderness complex. 
Least-cost travel grids of were generated for each combination of the three species and three core protected 
areas. These consisted of cumulative distances calculated for every cell in the region from the nearest point of 
a given defined core protected area, weighted by the habitat suitability cost grid. 
The best corridors indicated between a pair of protected areas varied according to the species, as may be 
expected given differing habitat preferences and sensitivity to human activities. A brief synopsis of each 
modeled corridor is given below. 
The Greater Yellowstone -- Northern Continental Divide connection
The distance between the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem (GYE) and the Northern Continental Divide 
Ecosystem (NCDE) is approximately 200 kilometers. The area in between consists of a complex of forested 
mountains and open grassland/sagebrush valleys, with varying connectivity among them. The three species 
analyzed all tend to maintain close proximity to tree cover. They are likely to be unable to use the expanses 
of wide open grasslands and shrublands which occur in areas such as the Missouri River Valley near 
Townsend, MT. For all species, any route from the GYE to the NCDE involves crossing two interstate 
highways -- I-90 and I-15. 
The figure below shows the results of the grizzly bear model for this regional linkage. The corridors in this 
figure are color-coded, with warmer colors indicating better areas of habitat connectivity. Bottlenecks are 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 11 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
indicated in parts of the corridors which are more constricted. The first and second best major corridor 
routes for grizzly bears are depicted, with one route being superior to others. According to our work, the 
potential corridor offering the best chance of successful transit consists of the Gallatin, Bridger, and Big Belt 
mountain ranges. A secondary route for bears, far inferior to the primary in this analysis, is comprised 
primarily of the Taylor-Hilgard, Gravelly, Tobacco Root, Whitetail/ONeil, and Boulder mountain ranges. 
 
For elk the route which appears to offer the best corridor (shown below) leaves the GYE at the north end of 
the Absaroka Range and continues to the NCDE via the Bridger and Big Belt ranges. The main corridor 
routes for elk converge with the primary grizzly route in the Bridger range. The former, however, has several 
interweaving braids of highly suitable corridor routes, including three which roughly parallel each other 
between Interstate 90 and the NCDE. Our model indicates more flexibility in corridor planning for elk than 
for grizzly bears in these areas. 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 12 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
 
The cougar preferred corridor route (below) also in large part follows the spine of the Big Belt and Bridger 
ranges. As with the elk, in some areas more than one main route is indicated, although the primary route is in 
all cases much wider than the others. This results suggests that a single wide corridor may suffice for 
transiting cougars in linking the GYE with the NCDE. 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 13 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
 
The Greater Yellowstone -- Salmon-Selway connection
Although we modeled corridors for all three species in this area, we present here only the results for grizzly 
bears to illustrate one set of potential corridors. Grizzly bears originating in either the GYE or Salmon-
Selway Ecosystem (SSE), according to our model, might best transit this roughly 380 kilometer distance 
along a route comprised mainly of the Centennial Mountains dividing Montana from Idaho. From the east 
this corridor begins from the south end of the Madison Range, follows nearly 200 kilometers along the 
continental divide (following the Centennial mountains), and then crosses over the Lemhi Valley to the Lemhi 
Range of Idaho. From the Lemhi Range two routes fork and head west into the Frank Church - River of No 
Return Wilderness area. 
 
The Salmon-Selway -- Northern Continental Divide connection
The distance between the Salmon-Selway (SSE) and Northern Continental Divide Ecosystems (NCDE) is 
much shorter in air miles than between the other core areas. The least cost path corridor routes modeled 
from the SSE to the NCDE were similar for all three species. A representative example is the grizzly bear 
corridor presented below. Within the constraints of the methods, the best routes crossed from the Bitterroot 
Mountains to the north end of the Sapphire mountains, then arc to the north, passing west of Rattlesnake 
wilderness area. The corridor then takes a fairly direct route to the southwest lobe of the Bob Marshall 
wilderness complex. This route passes close to the densely inhabitat area around Missoula, MT. 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 14 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
 
Discussion
Although there has been debate over the value of corridors, we feel that the arguments are largely semantic 
in nature. There can be little doubt that individual animals disperse over long distances from their natal areas 
and that these movements constitute gene flow and demographic interchange between populations. As 
habitat becomes fragmented, dispersal routes are cut off or deflected. If a route remains over which an 
animal can conceivable travel, it may as well be termed a "corridor". Those who are skeptical of the corridor 
concept are concerned that there is often little empirical evidence that a given corridor may actually function 
as such for the species in question. On the other hand there are very many instances where animals have 
been shown to use what little habitat remains in an area for movement. Opponents worry that the cost of 
providing a corridor may outweigh the benefits. This may be the case in highly developed landscapes where 
habitat must be restored in expensive real estate in order to provide a corridor, but it is of much less concern 
in landscapes like the Northern Rockies where the habitat and the connections still exist but are rapidly being 
altered. 
On the basis of radiotracking data and genetic data alone in the Northern Rockies, we are confident that 
animals disperse on a regional basis. Some species such as wolves or cougars can cover the distance 
between protected reserves in a single season; others such as grizzly bears, fisher, lynx, or pine marten may 
take several generations to move from one large reserve to another. We used a first approximation model to 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 15 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
define the areas most useful to maintain this connectivity. The results of our regional scale wildlife corridor 
analyses indicate several routes which may provide the best opportunities for successful animal transits. At 
this first glance, they appear to be reasonable, as they transit areas known to contain good habitat and which 
in general lack people. 
Results have not yet been validated in the field, although various segments of the routes we arrived at are 
known to be used as travel routes by various species. In particular, many of the high-risk bottlenecks where 
animals must cross highways are convergent with our mapping analysis and records of road-kills or 
radiolocation data. 
The results are strongly dependent on the accuracy of the model inputs, as well as on the formula used to 
combine them into a single dataset (cell resistance to transit). There may be a variety of other formulas which 
are equally valid. Other than the grizzly bear cumulative effects model, there is little in the literature to help 
guide the variable weighting and the specific form of the model. 
Conclusions
The concept of corridors has become well entrenched in conservation thinking; however, the methodology 
and implementation of these concepts is only now beginning to take shape. As we move slowly towards a 
systematic consensus of definitions and techniques, critical habitat for linkage of populations may be altered 
without an understanding (or in spite of) its importance for wildlife. As the U.S.Fish and Wildlife Service 
Grizzly Bear Recovery Plan states: 
"Future land management activities within these areas may be critical to
maintaining their utility as linkage zones.  It is essential that existing options 
carnivore movement between existing ecosystems be maintained while the 
evaluation of linkage zones is underway.  Management strategies that limit 
human-induced mortality and address access management will facilitate the 
maintenance of the potential of these zones during the 5-year evaluation period.   
On public lands, management prescriptions similar to big game summer range
 prescriptions that address access management would likely conserve any existing
potential of these areas for linkage until completion of the 5-year evaluation proc
As of this writing, the 5-year process of linkage assessment for grizzly bears by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service will take at least one more year. This analysis is based upon the grizzly bear cumulative effects model 
(ICE6 1994), a complex habitat suitability model that is nearing completion of validation by each recovery 
zone. It should adequately address linkage concerns for grizzly bears when it is done: currently it is being 
applied to a pilot study in the Swan Valley of Montana. However, in the interim there is no mechanism for 
evaluating potential corridor areas or ensuring that "existing options for carnivore movement between existing 
ecosystems be maintained while the evaluation of linkage zones is underway". In addition there is no 
concerted agency effort to address habitat connections for populations of other threatened or sensitive 
species such as wolverine, fisher, or lynx. 
We offer this approach to identifying important habitat connections for wildlife movement in the Northern 
Rockies as a first-generation, simple, broad-scale picture of existing habitat that has a high probability of 
connecting the large core reserves for dispersing wildlife species. We feel that the three "umbrella species" 
we have chosen should serve to delineate core areas and buffer zones for movement corridors that will 
include habitat needs of the majority of wildlife species. We hope that land management agencies will 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 16 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
incorporate the results of our analysis in planning management activities within the areas we have identified as 
probable corridors, and postpone any significant alteration of existing habitat until more refined and more 
comprehensive models are developed. 
Future work
The least-cost path analysis is one of several techniques for indicating best routes for wildlife through the 
Northern Rockies. It offers advantages in terms of ease of computation and interpretation. A disadvantage is 
that it may not be the path of least resistance -- i.e. the path through which the average cell (resistance) value 
may be minimized, in which a longer route could be superior. Delineating a 'least average cost' path, 
however, would be much more computationally demanding, due to the number of possible cell-path 
combinations in a large region. 
Another method we are pursuing is a Monte Carlo simulation in which we are modeling the three species 
movements in the same 'resistance to transit' cell grids, given varying degrees of randomness. The results of 
this type of analysis may provide a more realistic view of corridors, bottlenecks and other impediments than 
the strictly deterministic least-cost path analysis described in this paper. 
Literature Cited
Apps, C., 1996. Bobcat (Lynx rufus) habitat selection and suitability assessment in southeast British 
Columbia. M.S. Thesis. University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta. 
Beier, P. 1993. Determining minimum habitat areas and habitat corridors for cougars. Conservation Biology 
7:94-108. 
Craighead, F.L. 1994. Conservation genetics of grizzly bears. PhD Diss. Montana State University, 
Bozeman, Montana. 191 pp. 
Craighead, F.L., and E. Vyse. 1996. Brown/grizzly bear metapopulations. In: D. McCullough (Ed.) 
Metapopulations and Wildlife Conservation Management. Island Press, Washington DC and Covelo 
California. Chapter 14: pp. 325-351. 
Ehrlich, P. R. 1986. The Loss of Diversity. In: E. O. Wilson (Ed.) Biodiversity. National Academy Press, 
Washington D.C. pp. 21-27. 
Gilpin, M.E., and M.E. Soulé. 1986. Minimum viable populations: Processes of species extinction. In: M.E. 
Soulé (Ed.) Conservation Biology: the science of scarcity and diversity. pp 19-34. 
Greenwood, P.J. 1980. Mating systems, philopatry and dispersal in birds and mammals. Animal Behaviour. 
28:1140-1162. 
Harris, L. 1984. The Fragmented Forest: Island Biogeography Theory and the Preservation of Biotic 
Diversity. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
ICE6. 1994. ICE6 Tool Kit for Cumulative Effects Analysis. Systems for Environmental Management, 
Missoula MT


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 17 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
Missoula MT. 
Lovejoy, T. E. and others. 1986. Edge and other effects of isolation on Amazon forest fragments. In: Soule, 
M. E. (Ed.) Conservation Biology: The Science of Scarcity and Diversity. Sinauer and Associates, 
Sunderland, MA. pp. 251-285 
McCord , C.M. 1974. Selection of winter habitat by bobcats on the Quabbin Reservation, Massachusetts. 
Journal of Mammalogy 55:428-437. 
Noss, R.F., and L.D. Harris. 1986. Nodes, networks, and MUMs: preserving diversity at all scales. 
Environmental Management 10:299-309. 
Noss, R.F. 1983. A regional landscape approach to maintain diversity. BioScience 33:700-706. 
Noss, R.F. 1987. Protecting natural areas in fragmented landscapes. Natural Areas Journal 7:2-13. 
Noss, R.F. 1992. The Wildlands Project: land conservation strategy. Wild Earth (special issue):10-25. 
Noss, R.F., H.B. Quigley, M.G. Hornocker, T. Merrill, and P.C. Paquet. 1996. Conservation biology and 
carnivore conservation in the Rocky Mountains. Conservation Biology 10(4):949-963. 
Paetkau D., L. Waits, P. Clarkson, L. Craighead, E. Vyse, R. Ward, and C. Strobeck. 1997a. Dramatic 
variation in genetic diversity across the range of North American brown bears. In Preparation. 
Paquet, P., and A. Hackman. 1995. Large carnivore conservation in the Rocky Mountains: A long-term 
strategy for maintaining free-ranging and self-sustaining populations of carnivores. World Wildlife Fund 
Canada, Toronto, Canada. 
Picton, H. 1986. A possible link between Yellowstone and Glacier grizzly bear populations. Proceedings 
International Conference on Bear Research and Management. 6:7-10. 
Quigley, T.M., R.W. Haynes, and R.T. Graham (Eds.) 1996. Integrated Scientific Assessment for 
Ecosystem Management in the Interior Columbia Basin. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report 
PNW-GTR-382. Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, Oregon. pp 165-167. 
Ruggiero, L.F., K.B. Aubrey, S.W. Buskirk, L.J. Lyon, and W.J. Zielinski (Eds.). 1994. The scientific basis 
for conserving forest carnivores: American marten, fisher, lynx, and wolverine, in the Western United States. 
USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-254. Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment 
Station, Fort Collins, Colorado. p. 133. 
Saunders, D.A. and R.J. Hobbs (Eds.) Nature Conservation 2: the role of corridors. Beatty and Sons, 
Surrey UK. 442 pages. 
Shaffer, M. 1981. Minimum population sizes for species conservation.. BioScience 31:131-134. 
Shaffer, M. 1987. Minimum viable populations: Coping with uncertainty. In: M.E. Soulé (Ed.) Viable 
Populations for Conservation. Cambridge: Cambridge University press. pages 69-86. 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 18 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
Shaffer, M. 1978. Determining minimum viable population sizes: A case study of the grizzly bear (Ursus 
arctos L.). PhD Diss. Duke University. 
Simberloff , D.S., J.A. Farr, J. Cox, and D.W. Mehiman. 1992. Consequences and costs of conservation 
corridors. Conservation Biology 1:63-71. 
Simberloff , D.S., and L.G. Abele. 1976. Island biogeograhy theory and conservation practice. Science 
191:285-286. 
Soule, M.E., and M.E. Gilpin. 1991. The theory of wildlife corridor capability. In: D.A. Saunders and R.J. 
Hobbs (Eds.) Nature Conservation 2: the role of corridors. Beatty and Sons, Surrey UK. pp3-8. 
USDA Forest Service. 1996. Status of the Interior Columbia Basin: summary of scientific findings. PNW-
GTR-385. Portland, OR. 144pp. 
USFWS. 1993. Grizzly bear recovery plan. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Missoula, Montana. 181pp. 
Walker, Richard American Wildlands 40 E. Main St. #2 Bozeman MT 59715 tel: 406-586-8175 fax: 406-
586-8242 rich@wildlands.org 
Craighead, Frank Lance. American Wildlands 40 E. Main St. #2 Bozeman MT 59715 406-586-8175 
LCRAIGHEAD@AOL.COM 


Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS
Page 19 of 19
file://C:\mwp\school\Geog 4405\Analyzing Wildlife Movement Corridors in Montana Using GIS.htm 1/30/2001
