--- 
source: E9D78B54-049E-48D6-AAC3-9E11E3A6196E.pdf
--- 

Editorial
Ten Simple Rules for Doing Your Best
Research, According to Hamming
Thomas C. Erren*, Paul Cullen, Michael Erren, Philip E. Bourne
T
his editorial can be considered
the preface to the ‘‘Ten Simple
Rules’’ series [1–7]. The rules
presented here are somewhat
philosophical and behavioural rather
than concrete suggestions for how to
tackle a particular scientiﬁc
professional activity such as writing a
paper or a grant. The thoughts
presented are not our own; rather, we
condense and annotate some excellent
and timeless suggestions made by the
mathematician Richard Hamming two
decades ago on how to do ‘‘ﬁrst-class
research’’ [8]. As far as we know, the
transcript of the Bell Communications
Research Colloquium Seminar
provided by Dr. Kaiser [8] was never
formally published, so that Dr.
Hamming’s thoughts are not as widely
known as they deserve to be. By
distilling these thoughts into something
that can be thought of as ‘‘Ten Simple
Rules,’’ we hope to bring these ideas to
broader attention.
Hamming’s 1986 talk was
remarkable. In ‘‘You and Your
Research,’’ he addressed the question:
How can scientists do great research,
i.e., Nobel-Prize-type work? His
insights were based on more than forty
years of research as a pioneer of
computer science and
telecommunications who had the
privilege of interacting with such
luminaries as the physicists Richard
Feynman, Enrico Fermi, Edward
Teller, Robert Oppenheimer, Hans
Bethe, and Walter Brattain, with
Claude Shannon, ‘‘the father of
information theory,’’ and with the
statistician John Tukey. Hamming
‘‘became very interested in the
difference between those who do and
those who might have done,’’ and he
offered a number of answers to the
question ‘‘why . . . so few scientists
make signiﬁcant contributions and so
many are forgotten in the long run?’’
We have condensed Hamming’s talk
into the ten rules listed below:
Rule 1: Drop Modesty
To quote Hamming: ‘‘Say to yourself:
‘Yes, I would like to do ﬁrst-class work.’
Our society frowns on people who set
out to do really good work. But you
should say to yourself: ‘Yes, I would like
to do something signiﬁcant.’’’
Rule 2: Prepare Your Mind
Many think that great science is the
result of good luck, but luck is nothing
but the marriage of opportunity and
preparation. Hamming cites Pasteur’s
adage that ‘‘luck favours the prepared
mind.’’
Rule 3: Age Is Important
Einstein did things very early, and all
the ‘‘quantum mechanic fellows,’’ as
well as most mathematicians and
astrophysicists, were, as Hamming
notes, ‘‘disgustingly young’’ when they
did their best work. On the other hand,
in the ﬁelds of music, politics, and
literature, the protagonists often
produce what we consider their best
work late in life.
Rule 4: Brains Are Not Enough,
You Also Need Courage
Great scientists have more than just
brainpower. To again cite Hamming:
‘‘Once you get your courage up and
believe that you can do important
things, then you can. If you think you
can’t, almost surely you are not going
to. Great scientists will go forward
under incredible circumstances; they
think and continue to think.’’
Rule 5: Make the Best of Your
Working Conditions
To paraphrase Hamming, what most
people think are the best working
conditions clearly are not, because
people are often most productive when
working conditions are bad. One of the
better times of the Cambridge Physical
Laboratories was when they worked
practically in shacks—they did some of
the best physics ever. By turning the
problem around a bit, great scientists
often transform an apparent defect
into an asset. ‘‘It is a poor workman
who blames his tools—the good man
gets on with the job, given what he’s
got, and gets the best answer he can.’’
Rule 6: Work Hard and Effectively
Most great scientists have
tremendous drive, and most of us
would be surprised how much we
would know if we worked as hard as
some great scientists did for many
years. As Hamming says: ‘‘Knowledge
and productivity are like compound
interest. Given two people with exactly
the same ability, the one person who
manages day in and day out to get in
one more hour of thinking will be
tremendously more productive over a
lifetime.’’ But, Hamming notes, hard
work alone is not enough—it must be
applied sensibly.
Rule 7: Believe and Doubt Your
Hypothesis at the Same Time
Great scientists tolerate ambiguity.
They believe the theory enough to go
Citation: Erren TC, Cullen P, Erren M, Bourne PE
(2007) Ten simple rules for doing your best research,
according to Hamming. PLoS Comput Biol 3(10):
e213. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030213
Copyright:  2007 Erren et al. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author and source
are credited.
Thomas C. Erren is with the Institute and Policlinic for
Occupational and Social Medicine, School of
Medicine and Dentistry, University of Cologne, Ko¨ln,
Lindenthal, Germany. Paul Cullen is with the
Medizinisches Versorgungszentrum fu¨r
Laboratoriumsmedizin Dr. Lo¨er, Dr.Treder, Mu¨nster,
Germany. Michael Erren is with the Institute of
Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine,
Westphalian Wilhelms-University of Mu¨nster,
Mu¨nster, Germany. Philip E. Bourne is a Professor in
the Department of Pharmacology, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United
States of America.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: tim.erren@uni-koeln.de
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
October 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 10 | e213
1839


ahead; they doubt it enough to notice
the errors and faults so they can step
forward and create the new
replacement theory. As Hamming says:
‘‘When you ﬁnd apparent ﬂaws, you’ve
got to be sensitive and keep track of
those things, and keep an eye out for
how they can be explained or how the
theory can be changed to ﬁt them.
Those are often the great scientiﬁc
contributions.’’
Rule 8: Work on the Important
Problems in Your Field
It is surprising but true that the
average scientist spends almost all his
time working on problems that he
believes not to be important and not to
be likely to lead to important results.
By contrast, those seeking to do great
work must ask: ‘‘What are the
important problems of my ﬁeld? What
important problems am I working on?’’
Hamming again: ‘‘It’s that simple. If
you want to do great work, you clearly
must work on important problems. . . . I
ﬁnally adopted what I called ‘Great
Thoughts Time.’ When I went to lunch
Friday noon, I would only discuss great
thoughts after that. By great thoughts I
mean ones like: ‘What will be the
impact of computers on science and
how can I change it?’’’
Rule 9: Be Committed to Your
Problem
Scientists who are not fully
committed to their problem seldom
produce ﬁrst-class work. To a large
extent, creativity comes out of the
subconscious. If you are deeply
immersed in and committed to a topic,
day after day, your subconscious has
nothing to do but work on your
problem. Hamming says it best: ‘‘So the
way to manage yourself is that when
you have a real important problem you
don’t let anything else get the center of
your attention—you keep your
thoughts on the problem. Keep your
subconscious starved so it has to work
on your problem, so you can sleep
peacefully and get the answer in the
morning, free.’’
Rule 10: Leave Your Door Open
Keeping the door to your ofﬁce
closed makes you more productive in
the short term. But ten years later,
somehow you may not quite know what
problems are worth working on, and all
the hard work you do will be ‘‘sort of
tangential’’ in importance. He (or she)
who leaves the door open gets all kinds
of interruptions, but he (or she) also
occasionally gets clues as to what the
world is and what might be important.
Again, Hamming deserves to be quoted
verbatim: ‘‘There is a pretty good
correlation between those who work
with the doors open and those who
ultimately do important things,
although people who work with doors
closed often work harder. Somehow
they seem to work on slightly the wrong
thing—not much, but enough that they
miss fame.’’
In our view, Rule 10 may be the key to
getting the best research done because
it will help you to obey Rules 1–9, and,
most importantly, it will foster group
creativity [9]. A discussion over lunch
with your colleagues is often worth
much more than a trip to the library.
However, when choosing your
lunchmates (and, by implication, your
institution), be on your toes. As
Hamming says: ‘‘When you talk to other
people, you want to get rid of those
sound absorbers who are nice people
but merely say ‘Oh yes,’ and to ﬁnd
those who will stimulate you right back.’’
Acknowledgments
Funding. The authors received no speciﬁc
funding for this article.
Competing interests. The authors have
declared that no competing interests exist.
References
1.
Bourne PE (2005) Ten simple rules for getting
published. PLoS Comp Biol 1: e57. doi:10.1371/
journal.pcbi.0010057
2.
Bourne PE, Chalupa LM (2006) Ten simple
rules for getting grants. PLoS Comp Biol 2:
e12. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020012
3.
Bourne PE, Korngreen A (2006) Ten simple
rules for reviewers. PLoS Comp Biol 2: e110.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0020110
4.
Bourne PE, Friedberg I (2006) Ten simple rules
for selecting a postdoctoral position. PLoS
Comp Biol 2: e121. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.
0020121
5.
Vicens Q, Bourne PE (2007) Ten simple rules
for a successful collaboration. PLoS Comp Biol
3: e44. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030044
6.
Bourne PE (2007) Ten simple rules for making
good oral presentations. PLoS Comp Biol 3:
e77. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030077
7.
Erren TC, Bourne PE (2007) Ten simple rules
for a good poster presentation. PLoS Comp
Biol 3: e102. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030102
8.
Hamming R (1986) You and your research. In:
Kaiser JF Transcription of the Bell
Communications Research Colloquium
Seminar; 7 March 1986; Morristown, New
Jersey, United States. Available: http://www.cs.
virginia.edu/;robins/YouAndYourResearch.
html. Accessed 24 September 2007.
9.
Erren TC (2007) Hamming’s ‘‘open doors’’ and
group creativity as keys to scientiﬁc excellence:
The example of Cambridge. Med Hypotheses
2007 Sep 3: 17804173.
PLoS Computational Biology | www.ploscompbiol.org
October 2007 | Volume 3 | Issue 10 | e213
1840
