--- 
source: hsi-002.pdf
--- 

J : ~~ ;:....ry
N: ·.~ ..);ld
Wetlands Research center
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service
7·..···J Cajundome Boulevard
Lafayette. La.
70500
ljio~og~/';dl 0erV'C0C'· ~-' I
-:
' '''I Y"~l n I----
-
----
:-V'vS/OBf,·3:11 C.2
F!::.WU/\R':'
I ;a2
HAB!ITAT SUITABILITY INDEX M:;CEL3~
CHANNEL CATFISH
SK
361
. l' 54
no .
82 -
10 .2
nand Wildlife Service
'. Department of the Interior


The Biological Services Program was establi shed wi t hin the U. S. Fis h
and Wil dlife Service to supply scientific information and methodologies on
key environmental issues that impact fis h and wi ldli fe reso urces and their
supporting ecosystems.
The mission of the program is as follows:
•
To strengthen the Fish and Wi ldl ife Serv ice i n its role as
a primary source of information on national f ish and wild-
life resources, particularly in respect to environmental
impact assessment .
.
•
To gather, analyze, and present info rmation that wi ll aid
decisionmakers in the identi fication and resorution of
problems associated with major changes in land and water
use.
•
To provide bet ter ecological i nformation and eval uat ion
for Department of the Interior development programs , such
as those relat ing to energy development.
Informati on develo ped by the Biological Services Program is i nt ended
for use in the planning and decis ionma king process to prevent or mi nimi ze
the impact of devel opment on fi sh and
~I i l d li f e .
Research activities and
technical assistance services are based on an analysis of t he is sues , a
determination of t he decisionma kers involved and the ir i nformati on needs,
and an evaluation of t he state of t he art to identi fy information
~aps
and to determine priorities.
This is a st rategy that wi l l ensure t hat
the products produced and di sseminated are t imely and useful .
Proj ects "have been initi ated in t he following areas:
coal ext ract ion
and convers ion; power plants; geothermal , mineral and oil shal e develop-
ment; water resource analysis , j ncludi ng stream alterations and western
water allocation ; coastal ecosystems and Oute r Continental Shelf develop-
ment ; and systems inventory , including Nati onal Wetl and Inventory ,
habitat classi f ication and analysi s, and informat ion transfer .
The Biological Services Program consists of the Office of Biological
Servi ces in Washington, D.C. , wh ich i s responsibl e for overal l planning and
management; Nat ional Teams, whi ch provide the Program's cent ral scie nti fi c
and technical expertise and arrange ~o r contract ing biol09ica l services I
studies with states, universities, consulting firms , and othe rs; Regiona l
Staffs , who provide a link to problems at the operati ng leve l; and staffs at
certain Fish and Wil dli fe Service resear ch facili t ies , who conduct in-h ouse
research studies .


HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
CHANNEL CATFISH
by
Thomas E. McMahon
and
James W. Terrell
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, Colorado 80526
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington, D.C.
20240
FWS/OBS-82/10.2
February 1982


This report should be cited as:
McMahon,
T.
E.,
and J.
W. Terrell.
1982.
Habitat suitability
index models:
Channel
catfish.
U.S.D.l.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-82/l0.2.
29 pp.
i i


PREFACE·
The habitat use
information and Habitat Suitability Index
(HSI)
models
presented in this document are an aid for impact assessment and habitat man-
agement activities.
Literature concerning a species' habitat requirements and
preferences is reviewed and then synthesized into HSI models, which are scaled
to produce an index between 0 (unsuitable habitat) and 1 (optimal
habitat).
Assumptions used to transform habitat use information into these mathematical
models are noted,
and guidelines for model
application are described.
Any
models found in the literature which may also be used to calculate an HSI are
cited, and simplified HSI models, based on what the authors believe to be the
most important habitat characteristics for this species, are presented.
Use of the models presented in this publication for
impact assessment
requires the setting of clear study objectives and may require modification of
the mode 1s to
meet those obj ecti ves.
Methods for reduci ng mode 1 complex i ty
and recommended measurement techniques for model
variables are presented in
Appendix A.
The HSI models presented herein are complex hypotheses of species-habitat
relationships,
not
statements
of
proven
cause
and
effect
relationships.
Results of
mode~erformance tests,
when available, are referenced; however,
models that have demonstrated reliability in specific
situations
may
prove
unreliable
in
others.
For this
reason,
the
FWS encourages model
users to
convey comments and suggestions that may help us
increase
the utility
and
effectiveness of this habitat-based approach to fish and wildlife planning.
Please send comments to:
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
2625 Redwing Road
Ft. Collins, CO
80526
iii


CONTENTS
PREFACE
iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
vi
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
1
Genera 1
1
Age, Growth, and Food
1
Reproduct ion
1
Specific Habitat Requirements...................................
1
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODELS................................
4
Model Applicability...
4
Model Description - Riverine....................................
5
Model Description - Lacustrine..................................
8
Suitability Index (SI) Graphs for
Model Variables...............................................
9
Riverine Model..................................................
15
Lacustrine Model.............................................
17
Interpret i ng Mode 1 Outputs
22
ADDITIONAL HABITAT MODELS
24
Mode 1 1
24
Model 2
25
Model 3
25
REFERENCES CITED
25
v


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Dugan Sabins provided a major literature review in the early stages of
manuscript development.
We would like to thank Charles Walburg and Corlin
Cook for their suggestions and comments on earlier manuscripts.
An earlier
draft was published as an appendix in U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service (1981)1.
Word processing was provided by Dora Ibarra and Carolyn Gulzow.
The cover of
this document was illustrated by Jennifer Shoemaker.
1U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
1981.
Standards
for
the
development of
habitat suitability index models.
U.S.D.I.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Division
of Ecological Services, Washington, D.C.
103 ESM.
n.p.
vi


CHANNEL CATFISH (Ictalurus punctatus)
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
General
The native range of channel catfish (Ictalurus Runctatus) extends from
the
southern
portions
of the Canadian prairie provinces
south to the Gulf
states, west to
the Rocky Mountains,
and east to the Appalachian Mountains
(Trautman 1957; Miller 1966; Scott and Crossman 1973).
They have been widely
introduced outside this range and occur in essentially all of the Pacific and
Atlantic drainages in the 48 contiguous states (Moore 1968; Scott and Crossman
1973). The greatest abundance of channel catfish generally occurs in the open
(unleveed) floodplains of the Mississippi and Missouri River drainages (Walden
1964).
Age, Growth, and Food
Age at maturity in
channel catfish is variable.
Catfish from southern
areas with longer growing seasons mature earlier and at smaller sizes than
those from northern areas (Davis and Posey 1958;
Scott and Crossman 1973).
Southern catfish mature at age V or
less (Scott and Crossman 1973; Pflieger
1975) while northern catfish mature at age VI or greater for males and at age
VIII or greater for females (Starostka and Nelson 1974).
Young-of-the-year
(age
0)
catfish
feed
predominantly
on plankton
and
aquatic insects (Bailey and Harrison 1948;
Walburg 1975).
Adults are oppor-
tunistic
feeders
with
an extremely
varied diet,
including terrestrial
and
aquatic insects, detrital and plant material, crayfish,
and molluscs (Bailey
and Harrison 1948; Miller 1966;
Starostka and Nelson 1974).
Fish may form a
major part of the diet of catfish> 50 cm in
length (Starostka and
Nelson
1974).
Channel catfish diets
in rivers and reservoirs do not appear to be
significantly different (see Bailey and Harrison 1948;
Starostka and Nelson
1974).
Feeding is done by both vision and chemosenses (Davis 1959) and occurs
primarily at night (Pflieger 1975).
Bottom feeding is more characteristic but
food
is
al so
taken
throughout the water col umn (Scott and Crossman 1973).
Additional
information
on the
composition
of
adult
and juvenile diets
is
provided in Leidy and Jenkins (1977).
Reproduction
Channel catfish spawn in late spring and early summer (generally late May
through mid-July) when temperatures reach about 21° C (Clemens and Sneed 1957;
Marzolf
1957;
Pflieger
1975).
Spawning requirements
appear to
be a major
factor in determining habitat suitability for channel
catfish
(Clemens
and
Sneed
1957).
Spawning
is
greatly
inhibited if suitable
nesting
cover
is
unavailable (Marzolf 1957).
Specific Habitat Requirements
Channel
catfish populations occur over a broad
range
of
environmental
conditions (Sigler and Miller 1963; Scott and Crossman 1973). Optimum riverine


habitat is characterized by warm temperatures (Clemens and Sneed 1957; Andrews
et al.
1972; Biesinger et al.
1979) and a diversity of velocities, depths, and
structural
features that provide cover and food (Bailey and Harrison 1948).
Optimum lacustrine habitat is characterized by large surface area, warm temper-
atures,
high
productivity,
low to
moderate
turbidity,
and abundant
cover
(Davis 1959; Pflieger 1975).
Fry,
juvenile,
and adult
channel
catfish
concentrate
in
the
warmest
sections of rivers and reservoirs (Ziebell 1973; Stauffer et al.
1975; McCall
1977).
They strongly seek cover, but quantitative data on cover requirements
of channel catfish in rivers and reservoirs are not available.
Debris,
logs,
cavities,
boulders,
and cutbanks in
lakes and in
low velocity «
15 cm/sec)
areas of deep pools and backwaters of rivers will
provide cover for channel
catfish (Bailey and Harrison
1948).
Cover consisting of boulders and debris
in deep water is important as overwintering habitat (Miller 1966; Jester 1971;
Cross
and Collins
1975).
Deep
pools and littoral
areas
(s 5 m deep) with
.:?: 40% su i t abl e cover are assumed
to
be optimum.
Turbidities> 25 ppm
but
< 100 ppm may somewhat moderate the need for fixed cover (Bryan et al. 1975).
Riffle and run areas with rubble substrate and pools
«
15 cm/sec) and
areas with debris and aquatic vegetation are conditions associated with high
production
of
aquatic
insects
(Hynes
1970)
consumed by channel
catfish in
rivers (Bailey and Harrison 1948).
Channel catfish are most abundant in river
sections with a diversity of velocities and structural features. Therefore, it
is assumed that a riverine habitat with 40-60% pools would be optimum for
providing riffle habitat for food production and feeding and pool habitat for
spawning
and resting cover (Bailey and Harrison 1948).
It also is assumed
that at least 20% of lake or reservoir surface area should consist of littoral
areas
(:=; 5 m deep)
to provide adequate area for spawning,
fry and juvenile
rearing, and feeding habitat for channel catfish.
High
standing
crops
of
warmwater
fishes
are
associated
with
total
dissolved solids (TDS) levels of 100 to 350 ppm for reservoirs
in which the
concentrations
of
carbonate-bicarbonate
exceed
those
of
sulfate-chloride
(Jenkins 1976).
It is assumed that high standing crops of channel catfish in
1akes or reservoi rs will, on the average, correspond to thi s TDS 1eve 1.
Turbidity in rivers and reservoirs and reservoir size are other factors
that
may
influence
habitat
suitability
for
channel
catfish
populations.
Channel
catfish are abundant
in rivers and reservoirs with varying levels of
turbidity and siltation (Cross and Collins 1975).
However,
low to moderate
turbidities
«
100 ppm)
are
probably
optimal
for
both
survival
and growth
(Finnell
and Jenkins
1954;
Buck 1956;
Marzolf
1957).
Larger
reservoirs
(> 200 ha)
are probably more suitabl e reservoir habitat for channel catfi sh
populations because survival and growth are better than in smaller reservoirs
(Finnell
and Jenkins
1954;
Marzolf
1957).
Other factors
that
may affect
reservoir habitat suitability for
channel
catfish
are
mean
depth,
storage
ratio (SR),
and length of agricultural
growing season.
Jenkins (1974) found
that high mean depths were negatively correlated with standing crop of channel
catfish.
Mean depths are an inverse correlate of shoreline development (Ryder
et al.
1974),
thus higher mean depths may mean less littoral
area would be
available.
Jenkins
(1976)
also
reported that
standing
crops
of
catfishes
(Ictaluridae) peaked at an SR of 0.75.
Standing crops of channel catfish were
2


postively correlated to growing season length (Jenkins 1970).
However, harvest
of channe 1 catfi sh reported in
reservoi rs
was not corre 1ated with
growi ng
season length (Jenkins and Morais 1971).
Dissolved
oxygen
(DO)
levels
of
5 mg/l
are
adequate
for
growth
and
survival of channel catfish, but D.O. levels of ? 7 mg/l are optimum (Andrews
et al.
1973; Carlson et al.
1974).
Dissolved oxygen levels
< 3 mg/l
retard
growth (Simco and Cross 1966), and feeding is reduced at D.O. levels
< 5 mg/l
(Randolph and Clemens 1976).
Adult.
Adults in rivers are found in large, deep pools with cover.
They
move to-rTffles and runs at night to feed (McCammon 1956; Davis 1959; Pflieger
1971;
1975). Adults in reservoirs and lakes favor reefs and deep, protected
areas with rocky substrates or other cover.
They often move to the shoreline
or tributaries at night to feed (Davis 1959; Jester 1971; Scott and Crossman
1973).
The optimal
temperature range for growth
of adult
channel
catfish
is
26-29° C (Shrable et al.
1969;
Chen 1976).
Growth is poor at temperatures
< 21° C (McCammon
and
LaFaunce
1961;
Macklin
and Soule
1964;
Andrews and
Stickney 1972) and ceases at
< 18° C (Starostka and Nelson 1974).
An upper
lethal
temperature of 33.5° C has been
reported
for catfish
acclimated at
25° C (Carlander 1969).
Adult
channel
catfish were
most
abundant
in
habitats with salinities
< 1.7 ppt in Louisiana, although they occurred in areas with salinities up to
11.4 ppt
(Perry 1973).
Salinities s 8 ppt are tolerated with little or
no
effect,
but growth
slows
above this level
and does not occur at salinities
> 11 ppt (Perry and Avault 1968).
Embryo.
Dark and secluded areas are required for nesting (Marzolf 1957).
Males bui ld and guard nests in cavities,
burrows,
under rocks,
and in other
protected
sites
(Davis
1959;
Pflieger
1975).
Nests
in
large
impoundments
generally occur among rubble and boulders along protected shorelines at depths
of about 2-4 m (Jester 1971).
Catfish in large rivers are likely to move into
shallow, flooded areas to spawn (Bryan et al.
1975).
Lawler (1960)
reported
that spawning
in
Utah Lake,
Utah,
was concentrated in
sections of the lake
with abundant spawning sites of rocky outcrops, trees, and crevices.
The maie
catfish fans embryos for water exchange and guards the nest from predators
(Miller 1966; Minckley 1973).
Embryos can develop in the temperature range of
15.5 to 29.5° C, with the optimum about 27° C (Brown 1942; Clemens and Sneed
1957).
They do not develop at temperatures
< 15.5° C (Brown 1942).
Embryos
hatch in 6-7 days at 27° C (Clemens and Sneed 1957).
Laboratory studies indicate that embryos three days old and older can
tolerate salinities up to 16 ppt until hatching, when tolerance drops to 8 ppt
(Allen
and Avault
1970).
However,
2 ppt salinity is the highest level
in
which
successful
spawning
in
ponds has been observed (Perry 1973).
Embryo
survival and production in reservoirs will
probably be high in areas that are
not subject to disturbance by heavy wave action or rapid water drawdown.
Fry.
The optimal temperature range for growth of channel catfish fry is
29-30° C (West 1966).
Some growth does occur down to temperatures of 18° C
(Starostka and Nelson 1974), but growth generally is poor in cool waters with
average
summer temperatures
< 21° C (McCammon and LaFaunce 1961; Macklin and
3


Soule 1964; Andrews et al. 1972) and in areas with short agricultural growing
seasons (Starostka and Nel son 1974).
Upper incipient lethal
level s for fry
are about 35-38° C, depending on acclimation temperature (Moss and Scott 1961;
Allen
and
Strawn
1968).
Optimum salinities
for
fry
range
from 0-5 ppt;
salinities
~ 10 ppt
are
marginal
as
growth
is greatly
reduced
(Allen
and
Avaul t 1970).
Fry habitat suitability
in
reservoirs
is related to
flushing rate of
reservoirs in midsummer.
Walburg (1971)
found abundance and survival
of fry
greatly decreased at flushing rates < 6 days in July and August.
Channel
catfish fry have strong shelter-seeking tendencies (Brown et al.
1970), and cover availability will be important in determining habitat suit-
ability.
Newly hatched fry remain in the nest for 7-8 days (Marzolf 1957) and
then disperse to shallow water areas with cover (Cross and Collins 1975).
Fry
are commonly found aggregated near cover in protected, slow-flowing (velocity
< 15 em/sec) areas of rocky riffles,
debris-covered gravel,
or sand bars in
clear
streams
(Davis
1959;
Cross
and Collins
1975),
and
in
very
shallow
«
0.5 m) mud or sand substrate edges of flowing channels along turbid rivers
and bayous (Bryan et al.
1975).
Dense aquatic vegetation generally does not
provide optimum cover because predation on fry by centrarchids is high under
these conditions, especially in clear water (Marzolf 1957; Cross and Collins
1975).
Fry overwinter under boulders
in riffles
(Miller
1966)
or
move
to
cover in deeper water (Cross and Collins 1975).
Juvenile.
Optimal habitat for juveniles is assumed to be similar to that
for fry.
The temperature range most suitable for juvenile growth is reported
to be 28-30° C (Andrews et al. 1972; Andrews and Stickney 1972).
Upper lethal
temperatures are assumed to be similar to those for fry.
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODELS
Model Applicability
Geographic area.
The model is applicable throughout the 48 conterminous
States.
The standard of comparison for each individual variable suitability
index is the optimum value of the variable that occurs anywhere within the 48
conterminous States.
Therefore,
the model
will
never provide an HSI
of 1.0
when applied to water bodies in the Northern States where temperature-related
variables do not reach the optimum values for channel
catfish found
in
the
Southern States.
Season.
The model provides a rating for a water body based on its ability
to support a self-sustaining population of channel catfish through all
seasons
of the year.
Cover types.
The model is applicable in riverine, lacustrine, palustrine,
and estuarine habitats, as described by Cowardin et al. (1979).
Minimum habitat area.
Minimum habitat
area
is
defined as
the minimum
area of contiguous suitable habitat that is required for a species to succes-
fully live and reproduce.
No attempt has been made to establish a minimum
4


habitat size for channel catfish,
although this species is most abundant in
larger water bodies.
Verification level.
The acceptable output of
these models is an index
between 0 and 1 which the authors
believe
has
a positive
relationship
to
carrying capacity.
In order to verify that the model output was acceptable,
sample data sets were developed for calculating HSI's from the models.
The sample data sets and their relationship to model
verification are
discussed in greater detail following the presentation of the models.
Model Description
It is assumed that channel catfish habitat quality is based primarily on
their food,
cover, water quality,
and reproduction requirements.
Variables
that have been shown to have an impact on the growth, survival, distribution,
abundance, or other measure of well-being of channel catfish are placed in the
appropriate
component
and a component
rating
derived
from the
individual
variable suitability indices (Figs. 1 and 2).
Variables that affect habitat
quality for channel catfish, but which do not easily fit into these four major
components,
are combi ned under the "other component."
headi ng.
Levels of
a
variable that are near lethal or result in no growth cannot be offset by other
variables.
Model Description - Riverine
Food component.
Percent cover (V2 ) is assumed to be important for rating
the food component because if cover is available, fish would be more likely to
occupy
an area and utilize the food resources.
Substrate
(V 4 )
is
included
because stream productior, pocent i al of aquatic insects (consumed directly by
both channel catfish and their prey species) is related to amount and type of
substrate.
Cover
co~nent.
Percent pools (VI) is included because channel catfish
utilize
pools
as
cover.
Percent
cover
(V 2 )
is
an
index
of
all
types of
objects, including logs and debris, used for cover in rivers.
Average current
velocity in cover areas (VIS) is important because the usable habitat near a
cover object decreases if cover objects are surrounded by high velocities.
Water quality component.
The water
quality
component
is
limited
to
temperature,
oxygen, turbidity,
and salinity measurements.
These
parameters
have been
shown to effect growth or survival,
or
have been correlated with
changes
in
standing
crop.
Variables
related
to
temperature,
oxygen,
and
salinity are assumed to be limiting when they approach lethal levels.
Toxic
substances are not considered.
5


Habitat Variables
Life Requisites
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
(V 6 )
season
Temperature (adult) (V s )
Temperature (fry) (Vl 2 )
Temperature (juvenile) (Vl 4 )
Di ssol ved oxyge~rn~(~V~s2)-=========~§~~~ Water qual ity (CWQ) ---~HSI
Turbidity (V7 )
-
Salinity (adult) (V9 )
Salinity (fry, juvenile) (Vl J )
Length of agricultural growing
~~ poo1s (V1 ) -====================-..-
% cover (V2 )
-
~ Cover (CC)
Average current velocity (Vl S ) -------
~~ pools (V l )
% cover (V2 )
Dissolved oxy~g~e~n~(~V~s~)~===============~~Reproduction(CR)
Temperature (embryo) (VlO ) ----===
Salinity (embryo) (Vl l )
Figure 1.
Tree diagram illustrating relationship of habitat variables
and life requisites in the riverine model for the channel catfish.
Dashed lines indicate optional variables in the model.
6


Habitat Variables
% cover (V2) -
~6 1ittora 1 are~a-(~V~3~)~===~===========::='~ Food (CF)
Total dissolved solids (VIS)
HSI
---
----
Temperature (adult) (V s )
Temperature (fry) (V I2)
Temperature (juvenile) (V I4)
Dissolved
oxyge?rn~(~V~8~)-===========~::::~~7Water quality (CWO)
Turbidity (V,) -
II
Salinity (adult) (V 9 )
/
/
Salinity (fry, juvenile) (VI3)
/
I
Length of agricultural growing season (Vs )
Storage ratio (VIS)~
Other (COT)
Flushing rate (VI')
% cover (V 2)
% littoral area (V 3)
Dissolved oxygen (V8)1~==========~~~Reproduction (CR)
,
Temperature (embryo) (V I O)
Salinity (embryo) (VII)
Figure 2.
Tree diagram illustrating relationship of habitat variables
and life requisites in the lacustrine model for the channel catfish.
Dashed lines indicate optional variables in the model.
7


Reproduction component.
Percent pools (V l ) is in the reproductive compo-
nent because channel
catfish spawn
in
low velocity areas in rivers.
Percent
cover
(V 2 )
is
in
thi s component
si nce
channel
catfi sh
requi re
cover
for
spawning.
If minimum dissolved oxygen (DO) levels within pools and backwaters
during midsummer
(Va) are adequate,
they should be adequate during spawning,
which
occurs earlier
in
the year.
DO levels measured during
spawning and
embryo development
could
be substituted for
Va.
Two additional
variables,
average water
temperatures within pools and backwaters during
spawning and
embryo development
(Vl C )
and
maximum
salinity during
spawning
and embryo
develo~ment (Vl l )
are
included because these water quality conditions affect
embryo survival and development.
Model Description - Lacustrine
Food component.
Percent cover (V2 ) is included since it is assumed that
if cover is available, channel catfish would be more likely to utilize an area
for feeding.
Percent littoral
area (V3 )
is included because littoral
areas
generally produce the greatest amount of food and feeding habitat for catfish.
Total
dissolved solids (T05)
(V l 6 )
is included because adult channel catfish
eat fish, and fish production in lakes and reservoirs is correlated with T05.
C0 ver comp0 nent.
Per cent .c0 ver
(V 2 )
i sin c1uded sin ce channe1 catf is',
strongly seek structural
features of logs,
debri s , brush,
and other objects
for shelter.
Percent littoral
area (V3 )
is included because all
life stage
predominantly utilize cover found in littoral areas of a lake.
Water quality component.
Refer to riverine model description.
Reproduction component.
Percent
cover
(V 2 )
is
included
since catfish
build nests
in dark and secluded areas; spawning is not observed if suitable
cover is unavailable.
Percent littoral
area (V3 )
is included since catfish
spawning is concentrated along the shoreline.
DO (Va), temperature (V l C )
and
salinity
(Vl l )
are
included
because
these
water quality
parameters affect
embryo survival and development.
Other component.
For reservoirs, storage ratio (Vl S ) and maximum flushing
rate when fry are present (Vl 7 ) are included in this component because storage
ratio may affect standing crop and the flushing of fry from a reservoir outlet
can reduce the abundance of fry.
8


Suitability Index (51) Graphs for Model Variables
This
section
contains suitability
index
graphs
for
the
18 variables
described above, and equations for combining selected variables into a species
HSI using the component approach.
Variables pertain to a riverine (R) habitat,
lacustrine (L) habitat, or both (R, L).
Habitat
Variable
Suitability Graph
>,
+J
0.6
><
QJ
-0
0.8
c
.......
a.a +-.-.................,.--..--.."T"""'"................-r..................+
0.4
0.2
1. a +-'-................,J"..........,.....-'-'-~.................................+
,......
......
..Q
eu
+J
~
Vl
Percent pools during
average summer flow.
R
a
25
50
75
100
%
R,L
Percent cover (logs,
boulders, cavities,
brush, debris, or
standing timber) during
summer within pools,
backwater areas, and
littoral areas.
><
QJ
-0
C
.......
,......
......
..Q
eu
+J
o
10
20
30
40
50
9


L
(V 3 )
Percent littoral area
1.0
during summer.
x
QJ 0.8
"0c
I-<
>, 0.6
+>
..Cl 0.4
res
+>
::5 0.2
if>
0.0
0
25
50
75
100
%
R
(V 4 )
Food production potential
in river by substrate type
present during average
summer flow.
l-
I-
f-
A)
Rubble dominant in
riffle-runs with some
gravel and/or boulders
present; fines (silt
1.0
and sand) not common;
x
aquatic vegetation
~
abundant
(~ 3O~~ ) inc O.8
I-<
pool areas.
B)
Rubble, gravel,
.?;' 0.6
boulders, and fines
occur in nearly equal
..Cl 0 4
amounts in ri ffl e-run.B
.
areas; aquatic
vegeta~;
t ion i sID- 3O~6 i n
if> O.2
pool areas.
C)
Some rubble and gravel
0.0
present, but fines or
boulders are dominant;
aquatic vegetation is
scarce «
10%) in pool
area s.
D)
Fines or bedrock are
the dominant bottom
material.
Little or
no aquatic vegetation
or rubble present.
10
A
B
C
Class
o


R,L
(V s )
Average midsummer water
1.0
temperature within
pools, backwaters, or
x
(l) 0.8
littoral areas (Adult).
-0c
.......
>, 0.6
+-'
-r-r-
..0 0.4
ro
+-'
:::::l
VI 0.2
0.0
10
20
30
40
O(
R,L
(V 6 )
Length of agricultural
1.0
growing season
(frost-
x
free days).
(l) 0.8
-0c
.......
Note:
This variable
>, 0.6
TSOpt i ona1.
+-'
..0 0.4
ro
+-'
:::::l 0.2
VI
0.0
0
125
250
Days
R,L
(V 7 )
Maximum monthly average
1.0
turbidity during summer.
x
0.8
(l)
-0
C
I--<
0.6
>,
+-'
-r-r-
0.4
..0ro
+-'
0.2 -
:::::l
VI
0.0
100
200
300
ppm
11


x
Q)
"'0
C.....
R,L
Average mlnlmum dissolved
oxygen levels within
pools, backwaters, or
littoral areas during
midsummer.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
o
2
4
mg/l
6
8
R,L
(V9 )
Maximum salinity
1.0
during summer
x
(Adult).
Q)
0.8
"'0c.....
c-,
0.6
+-'
.....
.....
..0
0.4
rtl
+-'
.....
::s
0.2
(/)
0.0
0
5
10
15
ppt
R,L
( VI 0 )
Average water
temperatures within
1.0
pools, backwaters,
and littoral areas
x
during spawning and
Q)
0.8
"'0
embryo development
c
(Embryo) .
c-,
0.6
+-'
.....
0.4
..0
rtl
+-'
.....
::s
0.2
(/)
0.0
10
20
30
O(
12


R,L
(V 11 )
Maximum salinity
1.0
during spawning
and
embr~o development
><
0.8
(lJ
(Embryo) .
"U
t::
I-t
>,
0.6
+-'
r-
.,-
0.4
..Qco
+-'
::::l
0.2
Vl
0.0
a
10
20
ppt
R,L
(V 12)
Average midsummer water
1.0
temperature within pool s , ><
bacKwaters, or littoral
(lJ
0.8
-0
areas (Fry).
I::
>, 0.6
+-'
r-
'r-
0.4
..Clco
+-'
'r-
::::l
0.2
<./l
0.0
10
20
30
40
°C
R,L
(V 1 J )
Maximum salinity
during summer
><
1.0
(Fry, Juvenile).
(lJ
-0
I::
.......
0.8
>,
+-'
-r--'
0.6
.o
ro
+-'
0.4
'r-
::::l
<./l
0.2
0.0
S
6
7
8
9
10
ppt
13


R,L
( V14 )
Average midsummer water
1.0
temperature within
><
poo1s, backwaters, or
Q.J
-0 0.8
littoral areas
c
>-i
(Juvenile).
c-,
+> 0.6
..--
-r-t-
..0
res 0.4
+>
......
:::::l
(/) 0.2
0.0
10
20
30
40
O(
L
(V 1 S )
Storage ratio.
1.0
><
Q.J 0.8
-0c
>-i
c-, 0.6
+>
..--
..0 0.4
res
+>
:::::l
(/) 0.2
0.0
0
2
3
L
(V 1 6 )
Monthly average TDS
(total dissolved
1.0
solids) during
><
Q.J
summer.
-0c
0.8
>-i
c-,
+> 0.6
..0
res 0.4
+>
:::::l
(/) 0.2
0.0
0
500
1000
ppm
14


L
(V 1 7 )
Maximum reservoir
1.0
flushing rate while
fry present (Fry).
x
OJ
0.8
-0s::
.....~
>,
0.6
-l..J
.D
0.4
co
-l..J
:::l
0.2
Ul
0.0
4
5
6
Days
R
(V 18)
Average current velocity
1.0
in cover areas during
x
average summer flow.
OJ
-0
0.8
s::
~
c-,
0.6
-l..J
.Dco
0.4
+>
:::l
Ul
0.2
0.0
10
20
30
40
50
em/sec
Riverine Model
These equations utilize the life requisite approach and consist of four
components:
food, cover, water quality, and reproduction.
15


Water Quality (CWQ)'
+ V7
+ 2(Va) + V9
+ V1 3
7
3
If Vs, V1 2 , V1 4 Va, V9 , or V1 3 is S 0.4, then
CWQ equals the lowest
of the following:
Vs , V1 2 , V1 4 , Va, V9 , V1 3 , or the above equation.
Note:
If temperature data are unavailable, 2(V 6 ) (length of agricul-
tural growing season) may be substituted for the term
2(Vs + V1 2
+ V1 4 )
in the above equation
Reproduction (CR).
C
(V
V 2
V 2
V
2
V )1/8
R=
1
X
2
X
a
X
10
X
11
If Va, V1 0 , or V1 1 is s 0.4, then CR equals the lowest of the
following:
V6 , V1 0 , V1 1 , or the above equation.
HSI determination.
If CWQ or CR is s 0.4, then the HSI equals the lowest of the
following:
CWQ' CR, or the above equation.
16


Sources of data and assumptions made in developing the suitability indices
are presented in Table 1.
Sample data sets using riverine HSI model are listed in Table 2.
Lacustrine Model
This model utilizes the life requisite approach and consists of five
components:
food, cover, water quality, reproduction, and other.
Water Quality (CWQ)'
CWQ = same as in
Riverine HSI Model
Reproduction (CR).
If Va, V1 0 , or V1 1 is
~ 0.4, then CR equals the lowest of the
following:
Va, V1 0 , V1 1 , or the above equation.
17


Table 1.
Data sources and assumptions for channel catfish suitability indices.
Variable and source
Bailey and Harrison 1948
Bailey and Harrison 1948
Marzolf 1957
Cross and Collins 1975
Bailey and Harrison 1948
Marzolf 1957
Cross and Collins 1975
Bailey and Harrison 1948
Clemens and Sneed 1957
West 1966
Shrable et al. 1969
Starostka and Nelson 1974
Biesinger et al. 1979
Jenkins 1970
Finnell and Jenkins 1954
Buck 1956
Marzolf 1957
Moss and Scott 1961
Andrews et al. 1973
Carl son et al. 1974
Randolph and Clemens 1976
Perry and Avault 1968
Perry 1973
Assumption
Optimum conditions for a diversity of
velocities, depths, and structural
features for channel catfish will be
found when there are approximately equal
amounts of pools and riffles.
The strong preference of all life stages
of channel catfish for cover indicates
that some cover must be present for
optimum conditions to occur.
Lakes with small littoral area will pro-
vide less area for cover and food pro-
duction for channel catfish and are there-
fore less suitable.
The amount and type of substrate or the
amount of aquatic vegetation associated
with high production of aquatic insects
(used as food by channel catfish and
channel catfish prey species) is optimum.
Temperatures at the warmest time of year
must reach levels that permit growth in
order for habitat to be suitable.
Optimum
temperatures are those when maximum growth
occurs.
Growing seasons that are correlated with
high standing crops are optimum.
High turbidity levels are associated with
reduced standing crops and therefore are
less suitable.
Lethal levels of dissolved oxygen are
unsuitable.
DO levels that reduce feeding
are suboptimal.
Salinity levels where adults are most
abundant are optimum.
Any salinity
level at which adults have been
reported has some suitabilty.
18


Table 1.
(concluded)
Variable and source
Assumption
Brown 1942
Clemens and Sneed 1957
Perry and Avault 1968
Perry 1973
McCammon and LaFaunce 1961
Moss and Scott 1961
Macklin and Soule 1964
West 1966
Allen and Strawn 1968
Andrews 1972
Starostka and Nelson 1974
Allen and Avault 1970
Andrews et al. 1972
Andrews and Stickney 1972
Jenkins 1976
Jenkins 1976
Wal,burg 1971
Miller 1966
Scott and Crossman 1973
Cross and Collins 1975
Optimum temperatures are those which
result in optimum growth.
Temperatures
that result in death or no growth are
unsuitable.
Salinity levels at which spawning has
been observed are suitable.
Optimum temperatures for fry are those
when growth is best.
Temperatures that
result in no growth or death are unsuit-
able.
Salinities that do not reduce growth
of fry and juveniles are optimum.
Salinities that greatly reduce growth
are unsuitable.
Temperatures at which growth of juveniles
is best are optimum.
Temperatures that
result in no growth or death are unsuit-
able.
Storage ratios correlated with maximum
standing crops are optimum; those cor-
related with lower standing crops are
suboptimum.
Total dissolved solids (IDS) levels cor-
related with high standing crops of warm-
water fish are optimum; those correlated
with lower standing crops are suboptimum.
The data used to develop this graph are
primarily from southeastern reservoirs.
Flushing rates correlated with reduced
levels of fry abundance are suboptimal.
High velocities near cover objects will
decrease the amount of usable habitat
around the objects and are thus
considered suboptimum.
19


Table 2.
Sample data sets using riverine HS1 model.
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
Variable
Data
SI
Data
SI
Data
SI
% pools
Vi
60
1.0
90
0.6
15
0.5
01 cover
V2
50
1.0
10
0.4
5
0.2
10
Substrate for
V4
si It-
0.7
si It-
0.5
sand
0.2
food production
gravel
sand
Temperature-Adult
(0 C)
Vs
28
1.0
32
0.4
22
0.5
Growing season
V6
180
0.8
Turbidity (ppm)
V7
50
1.0
210
0.5
160
0.8
Dissolved oxygen
(mg/l)
Va
4.5
0.6
4.0
0.5
4.0
0.5
Salinity-adult
(ppt)
Vs
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
Temperature-Embryos
(OC)
Vi O
25
0.8
21.5
0.5
28.5
0.5
Salinity-Embryo
( ppt)
Vii
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
Temperature-Fry
(0 C)
V1 2
26.5
0.8
32
0.7
23
0.5
Salinity-Fry/
Juvenile (ppt)
V1 3
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
Temperature-
Juvenile (0 C)
V1 4
29
1.0
32
0.7
22
0.5
Velocity
V18
15
1.0
5
1.0
30
0.3
20


Table 2.
(concluded)
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
Variable
Data
51
Data
51
Data
51
Component 51
CF =
0.85
0.45
0.20
Cr
=
1. 00
0.62
0.31
'-'
CWO =
0.87
0.40*
0.69
CR =
0.86
0.58
0.47
H51 =
0.88
0.40*
0.43
*Note:
CWO S 0.4; therefore,
H51 = CWO in Data 5et 2.
21


HSI determination.
HSI
If CWO or CR is
~ 0.4, then the HSI equals the lowest of the
following:
CWO' CR, or the above equation.
Sample data sets using lacustrine HSI model are listed in Table 3.
Interpreting Model Outputs
The proper interpretation of the HSI
produced by the models is one of
comparison.
If two water bodies have large differences in HSI's, then the one
with the higher HSI should be able to support more catfish than the water body
with the
lower HSI, given that the model assumptions have not been violated.
The actual differences
in
HSI that indicate a true difference
in
carrying
capacity are unknown and likely to be high.
We have aggregated a large number
of variables into a single index with little or no quantitative information on
how the variables interact to effect carrying capacity.
The probability that
we have made an error in our assumptions on variable interactions is high.
However,
we believe the model is a reasonable hypothesis of how the selected
variables interact to determine carrying capacity.
Before using the model, any available statistical
models,
such as those
described under model
3 in the next section, should be examined to determine
if they better meet the goals of model
application.
Statistical
models are
likely to be more accurate
in predicting the value of a dependent variable,
such as
standing crop,
from habitat related variables
than
the
HSI
models
described above.
A statistical
model
is especially useful
when the habitat
variables in the data set used to derive the model have values similar to the
proposed model
application site.
The HSI models described above may be most
useful
when habitat conditions are dissimilar to the statistical
model
data
set or it is important to evaluate changes in variables not included in the
statistical model.
The sample data sets consist of different variable
values
(and their
corresponding
SI
score),
which although not actual
field measurements,
are
thought to represent realistic conditions that could occur in various channel
catfish riverine or lacustrine habitats.
We believe the HSI's calculated from
the data reflect what carrying capacity trends would be in riverine or lacus-
trine habitats with the characteristics listed in the respective data sets.
22


Table 3.
Sample data sets using lacustrine HS1 model.
Data set 1
Data set 2
Data set 3
Variable
Data
SI
Data
SI
Data
51
01 cover
V2
50
1.0
10
0.4
5
0.2
/0
% littoral area
V3
40
1.0
20
0.7
70
0.6
Temperature-Adult
(0 C)
Vs
26
1.0
20
0.3
33
0.2
Growing season
V6
180
0.8
Turbidity
V7
175
0.7
210
0.5
250
0.3
Dissolved oxygen
Va
4.5
0.6
4.5
0.6
2.5
0.2
Sa1in ity-AduIt
(ppt)
V9
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
Temperature-Embryo
(0 C)
V10
25
0.8
21.5
0.5
28
0.5
Salinity-Embryo
(ppt)
V11
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
Temperature-Fry
(0 C)
V12
26.5
0.8
32
0.7
23
0.5
Sa1i nity-Fry/
Juvenile (ppt)
V13
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
< 1
1.0
Temperature-
Juvenile (0 C)
V14
29
1.0
32
0.7
22
0.5
Storage ratio
V15
1.5
0.9
.3
0.7
0.8
1.0
TDS (ppm)
V1 6
200
1.0
300
1.0
600
0.6
Flushing rate
while fry
pre sen t (d ays)
V17
15
1.0
4
0.4
11
1.0
23


Table 3.
(concluded)
1. 00
0.70
0.47
1. 00
0.52
0.33
0.82
0.30*
0.20*
0.83
0.56
0.20
0.95
0.55
1. 00
0.89
0.30*
0.20*
Variable
Component SI
CF =
Cc
=
CWQ=
CR =
COT =
HSI =
Data set 1
Data
SI
Data set 2
Data
SI
Data set 3
Data
SI
*Note:
CWQ
~ 0.4; therefore,
HSI = CWQ in Data Sets 2 and 3.
ADDITIONAL HABITAT MODELS
Mode 1 1
Optimal
riverine
habitat
for
channel
catfish
is characterized
by the
following conditions, assuming water quality is adequate:
warm,
stable water
temperatures (summer temperatures of 25-31° C); an approximate 40-60% area of
deep pools; and abundant cover in the form of
logs,
boulders, cavities,
and
debris (>
40% of pool area).
HSI = number of above criteria present
3
24


Model 2
Optimal
lacustrine habitat for channel catfish is characterized by the
following conditions, assuming water quality is adequate:
warm,
stable water
temperatures (summer temperatures of 25-30° C); large surface area (> 500 ha);
moderate to high fertility
(TDS 100-350 ppm); clear to moderate turbidities
«
100 JTU); and abundant cover (> 40% in areas < 5 mdeep).
HSI = number of above criteria present
5
Model
3
Use the reservoir standing crop regression equations for catfishes pre-
sented by Aggus and Morais (1979)
to predict standing crop,
then divide the
predicted standing crop by the highest standing crop value used to develop the
regression equation, in order to obtain an HSI.
REFERENCES CITED
Aggus,
L.
R.,
and 0.1.
Morais.
1979.
Habitat suitability index equations
for
reservoi r s
based
on standi ng crop
of fi sh.
Nat1.
Reservoi r
Res.
Program.
Rept. to U.S. Fish Wildl. Serv., Hab. Eval. Proj., Ft. Collins,
CO.
120 pp.
Allen,
K. 0.,
and J.
W.
Avault.
1970.
The effect of salinity on growth of
channel catfish.
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc.
Game and Fish Commissioners
23:319-331.
Allen,
K.
0.,
and
K.
Strawn.
1968.
Heat
tolerance
of
channel
catfish,
Ictalurus
punctatus.
Proc.
Southeastern
Assoc.
Game
and
Fish
Commissioners 21:399-411.
Andrews, J. W., and R.
R. Stickney.
1972.
Interactions of feeding rates and
environmental temperature on growth, food conversion and body composition
of channel catfish.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 101(1):94-99.
Andrews, J.
W., L.
H.
Knight,
and T. Murai.
1972.
Temperature requirements
for high density rearing of channel catfish from fingerlings to market
size.
Prog. Fish-Cult. 34:240-242.
Andrews, J.
W., T. Murai,
and G. Gibbons.
1973.
oxygen
on
the
growth
of
channel
catfish.
102(4):835-838.
25
The influence of dissolved
Tran s .
Am.
Fish.
Soc.


Bailey,
R. M.,
and H.
M.
Harrison, Jr.
1948.
Food habits of the southern
channel catfish
(lcta~rus lacustri2 punctatus)
in the Des Moines River,
Iowa.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 75:110-138.
Biesinger,
K.
E.,
R. B. Brown,
C.
R. Bernick,
G. A. Flittner,
and
K.
E.
F.
Hokanson.
1979.
A national
compendium
of
freshwater
fish
and
water
temperature data.
Vol.
I.
U.S.
Environ. Protection Agency Rep., Environ.
Res. Lab., Duluth, Minn.
207 pp.
Brown,
B. E.,
1.
Inman,
and
A. Jearld,
Jr.
1970.
Schooling
and
shelter
seeking tendencies in fingerling catfish behavior.
Trans.
Am.
Fish. Soc.
99(3):540-545.
Brown,
L.
1942.
Propagation
of
the
spotted
channel
catfish
(Ictalurus.
lacustris QlJnctatus).
Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci. 45:311-314.
Bryan, C. F.,
F.
M. Truesdale, and D. S. Sabins.
of
the Atchafalaya
Basin,
annual
report.
Unit, Baton Rouge.
203 pp.
1975.
A limnological
survey
Louisiana
Coop.
Fish.
Res.
Buck,
H.
D.
1956.
Effects of turbidity on fish and fishing.
Trans.
N. Am.
Wildl. Conf. 21:249-261.
Carlander,
K.
C.
1969.
Channel catfish.
Pages 538-554 in Handbook of fresh-
water
fishes
of
the
United
States
and
Canada, -exclusive
of
the
Perciformes. Iowa State Univ. Press, Ames.
752 pp.
Carlson, A. R.,
R. E. Siefert,
and
L. J.
Herman.
1974.
Effects of
lowered
dissolved oxygen concentrations on channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus)
embryos and larvae.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 103(3):623-626.
Chen, T. H.
1976.
Cage culture of channel catfish in a heated effluent from
a power plant, Thomas Hill reservoir.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Univ. Missouri,
Columbia. 98 pp.
Clemens, H. P., and
K.
E. Sneed.
1957.
Spawning behavior of channel catfish,
ktaluru~ Lunctatus.
U.S.
Fish Wildl.
Servo
Spec.
Sci. Rep.-Fish.
219.
11 pp.
Cowardin,
L. M.,
V. Carter,
F. C. Golet, and E. T.
LaRoe.
1979.
Classifica-
tion
of wetlands and
deepwater habitats of the United States.
U.S.D.I.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-79/31.
103 pp.
Cross,
F. B., and J. T. Collins.
1975.
Fishes in Kansas.
Univ.
Kansas Mus.
Nat. Hist. Publ. Educ. Ser.
3.
180 pp.
Davis, J.
1959.
Management of channel catfish in
Kansas.
Univ.
Kansas Mus.
Nat. Hist. Misc. Publ. 21.
56 pp.
Davis, J.
T.,
and
L.
E.
Posey,
Jr.
1958.
Length
at
maturity
of
channel
catfish
(Ictalurus
lacustris)
in
Louisiana.
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc.
Game and Flsh.-COmmissioners 21:72-74.
26


Finnell,
J.
C.,
and
R.
M.
Jenkins.
Oklahoma
waters:
1954
revision.
37 pp.
(Cited in Miller 1966.)
1954.
Growth
of
channel
catfish
in
Oklahoma
Fish.
Res.
Lab.,
Rept.
41.
Hynes, H. B. N.
1970.
The ecology of running waters.
Univ.
Toronto Press,
Canada.
555 pp.
Jenkins,
R.
M.
1970.
The influence of engineering design and operation and
other
environmental
factors
on
reservoir
fishery
resources.
Water
Resources Bull. 6(1):110-119.
Jenkins, R. M.
1974.
Reservoir management prognosis:
migraines or miracles.
Proc. Southeastern Assoc. Game and Fish Commissioners 27:374-385.
Jenkins, R. M.
1976.
Prediction of fish production in Oklahoma reservoirs on
the basis of environmental variables.
Ann. Oklahoma Acad. Sci. 5:11-20.
Jenkins,
R. M.,
harvest in
Ha 11,
ed.
Publ. 8.
and
D. 1.
Morais.
1971.
Reservoir sport fishing effort and
relation to environmental
variables.
Pages 371-384
in
G. E.
Reservoir
fisheries
and
limnology.
Am.
Fish.
Soc.-Spec.
Jester,
D. B.
1971.
Effects of commercial
fishing,
species introductions,
and drawdown control on fish populations in Elephant Butte Reservoir,
New
Mex i co.
Pages
265-285
in
G. E. Ha 11,
ed.
Reservoi r
fi sheri es
and
limnology.
Am. Fish.
Soc~pec. Publ. 8.
Lawler,
R. E.
1960.
Investigations of the channel catfish of Utah
Lake. Utah
State Dept. Fish Game.
Inform. Bull. 60-8.
69 pp.
Leidy, G. R., and R. M. Jenkins.
1977.
The development of fishery compart-
ments
and
popul at i on
rate coeffi ci ents for
use
in
reservoi r ecosystem
modeling.
Contract
Report
Y-77-1,
prepared
for
Office,
Chief
of
Engineers, U.S. Army, Washington, D.C.
72 pp.
Macklin,
R.,
and
S.
Soule.
1964.
Feasibility of establishing
a warmwater
fish
hatchery.
Calif.
Fish
Game,
Inland
Fish.
Admin.
Rept.
64-14.
13 pp.
(Cited in Miller 1966.)
Marzolf,
R. C.
1957.
The reproduction of channel catfish in Missouri ponds.
J. Wildl. Manage. 21(1):22-28.
McCall,
T.
C.
1977.
Movement of channel
catfish,
Ictalurus
punctatus,
in
Cholla
Lake,
Arizona,
as
determined
by ultrasonic
tracking.
Western
Assoc. Game Fish. Comm. 57:359-366.
McCammon, G. W.
1956.
A tagging
experiment with channel catfish (Ictalurus
punctatus) in the lower Colorado River.
Calif. Fish Game 42(4):323-335.
McCammon,
G. W.,
and D. A.
LaFaunce.
1961.
Mortality rates and movement in
the channel
catfish population of the
Sacramento
Valley.
Calif.
Fish
Game 47(1):5-26.
27


Miller,
E.
E.
1966.
Channel
catfish.
Pages
440-463
in
A. Calhoun,
ed.
In 1and fi sheri es management.
Ca1if.
Fi sh
Game
Re s .-Agency,
Sacramento.
546 pp.
Minckley,
W.
L.
1973.
Fishes of Arizona.
Arizona Fish Game Publ., Phoenix.
293 pp.
Moore, G. A.
1968.
Vertebrates of the United States.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Moss,
D. D., and D. C. Scott.
1961.
Dissolved oxygen
requirements of three
species of fish.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 90(4):377-393.
Perry,
W.
G.
1973.
Notes on the
spawning of blue
and
channel
catfish
in
brackish water ponds.
Prog. Fish-Cult. 35(3):164-166.
Perry,
W. G.,
and J.
W. Avault.
1968.
Preliminary experiments on the culture
of
blue,
channel,
and
white
catfish
in
brackish
water
ponds.
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc. Game and Fish Commissioners 22:396-406.
Pflieger,
W.
L.
1971.
A distributional
study
of
Missouri
fishes.
Univ.
Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist. Publ. 20(3):225-570.
Pflieger,
W.
L.
1975.
Fishes of Missouri.
Missouri
Dept.
Conserv.
Publ.,
Columbia.
343 pp.
Randolph,
K.
N.,
and
H.
P.
Clemens.
1976.
Some
factors
influencing
the
feeding
behavior of channel
catfish
in
culture ponds.
Trans.
Am.
Fish.
Soc. 105(6):718-724.
Ryder,
R. A.
1965.
A method for estimating the potential fish production of
north-temperate lakes.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 94(3):214-218.
Ryder,
R. A., S.
R. Kerr,
K.
H. Loftus,
and H. A. Regier.
1974.
The morpho-
edaphic index,
a fish yield estimator -
review and evaluation. J.
Fish.
Res. Board Can. 31(5):663-688.
Scott,
W.
B., and E. J.
Crossman.
1973.
Freshwater fishes of Canada.
Fish.
Res. Board Can. Bull.
184.
966 pp.
Shrable, J. B., O. W. Tiemeier, and C. W.
Deyoe.
1969.
Effects of temperature
on rate of digestion by channel catfish.
Prog. Fish-Cult. 31(3):131-138.
Sigler,
W.
F., and R. R. Miller.
1963.
Fishes of Utah.
Utah Fish Game, Salt
Lake City.
203 pp.
Simco, D. A., and F. B. Cross.
1966.
Factors affecting growth and production
of channel
catfish,
Ictalurus punctatus.
Univ.
Kansas Mus.
Nat.
Hist.
Publ.17(4):191-256.
Starostka,
V. J.,
and
W.
R. Nelson.
Fish Wildl. Servo Tech. Pap. 81.
1974.
Channel catfish in
Lake Oahe.
U.S.
13 pp.
28


Stauffer, J.
R., Jr.,
K.
L. Dickson, J.
Cairns, Jr.,
W.
F.
Calhoun,
M.
T.
Masnik, and R. H. Myers.
1975.
Summer distribution of fish
species in
the
vicinity
of
a
thermal
discharge,
New
River,
Virginia.
Arch.
Hydrobiol. 76(3) :287-301.
Trautman, M. B.
1957.
Fishes of Ohio.
Ohio State Univ. Press.
683 pp.
Walburg, C. H.
survival,
Hall,
ed.
Publ. 8.
1971.
Loss of young fish in reservoir discharge and year-class
Lewis
and Clark Lake,
Missouri
River.
Pages 441-448 in G. E.
Reservoir
fisheries
and
limnology.
Am.
Fish.
Soc.-Spec.
Walburg,
C.
H.
1975.
Food of young-of-year channel catfish
in
Lewis
and
Clark Lake, a Missouri River reservoir.
Am. Midl. Nat. 93(1):218-221.
Walden, H. T.
1964.
Familiar freshwater fishes of America.
Harper and
Row,
New York.
324 pp.
West, B.
W.
1966.
Growth, food conversion, food
consumption and survival at
various
temperatures
of
the
channel
catfish,
Ictalurus
punctatus
(Rafinesque).
M.S.
Thesis.
Univ.
Arkansas,
Fayetteville.
(Cited
in
Shrable et al. 1969.)
Ziebell,
C.
1973.
Ultrasonic
transmitters
for
tracking
channel
catfish.
Prog. Fish-Cult. 35(1):28-32.
29


50212 "01
REPORT DOCUMENTATION
11,- REPORT
NO.
PAGE
\- FWS/OBS-82/10.2
4. ntle and Subtitle
Habitat Suitability Index Models:
Channel catfish
7. Author(s)
Thomas E. McMahon, and James W. Terrell
9. Performing Organization Name and Address
Ha bita t Eva1uat ion Procedures Grou p
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, Colorado
80526
12. Sponsoring Organization Name and Address Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of Interior
Wrtsh;ngton,
D.C.
20240
15. Supplementary Notes
-llL
Abstract (Limit: 200 words)
3.
Recipient's Accession No.
February 1982
6.
8.
Performing Organization Rept. No.
10.
Project/Task/Worll Unit No.
11. Contract(C) or Grant(G) No.
(C)
(G)
13. Type of Report &. Period Covered
Literature concerning the habitat requirements of the channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus)
is reviewed, and the data is then synthesized into Habitat Suitability Index models.
This is one in a series of publications developed to provide information on the habitat
requirements of selected fish and wildlife species.
Numerous literature sources have
been consulted in an effort to consolidate scientific data on species-habitat relation-
ships.
These data have subsequently been synthesized into explicit Habitat Suitability
Index (HSI) models.
The models are based on suitability indices indicating habitat
preferences.
Indices have been formulated for variables found to affect the life cycle
and survival of each species.
Habitat Suitability Index (HSI) models are designed to
provide information for use in impact assessment and habitat management activities.
The
HSI technique is a corollary to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Habitat Evaluation
Procedures.
~
I
17. Document Analysis
a. Descriptors
Habi tabi 1i ty
Fishes
b.
Identifiers/Open-Ended Terms
Habitat
Habitat Suitability Index
Channel catfish
Ictalurus punctatus
c. COSATI Field/Group
18. Availability Statement
Unlimited
! 19.
Security Class (This Report)
i
Unclassified
~ 20.
Security Class (This Page)
.
Unclassified
! 21.
No. of Pages
!
29
Ii 22.
Price
i
(S.. ANSI-Z39.18)
See Instructions on Reverse
'J
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1982-578-124/186 REGION No.8
OPTIONAL FORM 212
(4-77~
(Formerly NTIS-3S)
Department of Commerce


•
••• ..__
.... J~.
' .
'· 0 ,,-
Hawaiian Islands
(>
-(:(
Headq uarters . Division of Biological
Services, Wasnington, DC
x
Eastern Energy anO Land Use Team
Leetown , WV
*
Nationa l Coastal Ecosystems Team
Slidell, LA
•
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Ft. Coll ins. CO
•
Locat ions of Regional Off ices
REGION 1
Regional Director
U,S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Lloyd Five Hundred Building, Suite 1692
500 N.E. Multnomah Street
Portland , Oregon 97232
REGION 4
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Richard B. Russell Building
75 Spring Street , S.W.
Atlanta, Georgia 30303
I
J- - - -
---
6 1r-- - - ~ -
L,
J
I
:
- ~- --
I
I
1- - -'
I
Il,_
I 2
,,-~- -
-_.J
REGION 2
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
P.O. Box 1306
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87 103
REGION 5
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
One Gateway Center
Newton Corner, Massachusetts 02158
REGION 7
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
lOll E. Tudor Road
Anchorage, Alaska 99503
- ..~,.
REGION 3
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and WildlifeService
Federal Building, Fort Snelling
Twin Cities, Minnesota 551 J I
REGION 6
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
P.O. Box 25486
Denver Federal Center
Denver, Colorado 80225


u.s.
FISH .. WILDLIFE
f>ERVICE
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR hi?]
u.s.FISH ANDWILDLIFESERVICE
~
"'-r rw T " "
As the Nation's pri ncipal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has respon-
sibility for most of our ,nationally owned public lands and natural resources . This includes
fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources, protecting our fish and wildlife,
preserving th & environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The Department as-
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to assure that t heir development is in
the best interests of all our people. The Department also has a major respons ibility for
American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. adm inist ration.
