--- 
source: hsi-018.pdf
--- 

Biological Services Program
and
Division of Ecological Services
FWS/OBS·82/10.18
JULY 1982
e
'-
e
u.evord
e L
.sionc
70506
,
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
FOX SQUIRREL
Fish and Wildlife Service
u.s. Department of the Interior


The 8iological Services Program was established within the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service to supply scientific information and methodologies on
key environmental issues that impact fish and wildlife resources and their
supporting ecosystems.
The mission of the program is as follows:
•
To strengthen the Fish and Wildlife Service in its role as
a primary source of information on "4tiona1 fish and wild-
life resources. particularly in respect to environmental
impact assessment.
•
To gather, analyze, and present information that will aid
decisiOMlakers in the identification and resolution of
problems associated with major changes in land and water
use.
•
To provide better ecological information and evaluation
for Department of the Interior development programs. such
as those relating to energy development.
Information developed by the 8iological Services Program is intended
for use in the planning and decisionmaking process to prevent or minimize
the impact of development on fish and wl1dlife.
Research activities and
technical assistance services are based on an analysis of the issues, a
determination of the decisionmakers involved and their information needs,
and an evaluation of the state of the art to identify information gaps
and to determine priorities.
This is a strategy that will ensure that
the products produced and disseminated are timely and useful.
Projects have been initiated in the following areas:
coal extraction
and conversion;
po~r plants; geothermal, mineral and oil shale develop-
ment; water resource analysis, including stream alterations and western
water allocation; coastal ecosystems and Outer Continental Shelf develop-
ment; and systems inventory, including National Wetland Inventory.
habitat classification and analysis. and information tnnsfer.
The Biological Services Prognm consists of the Office of Biological
Services in Washington, D.C.• which is resp,onsible for overall planning and
management; National Teams. which pro'vide the Program's central scientific
and technical expertise and arrange for contracting
biolo~ical services
studies with states,
~niversities, consulting firms. and others; Regional
Staffs, who provide a link to problems at the operating level; and staffs at
certain Fish and Wildlife Service research fac11ities, who conduct in-house
research studies.
This model ;s designed to be used by the Division of Ecological Services
in conjunction with the Habitat Evaluation Procedures.


FWS/OBS-82/10.18
July 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
FOX SQUIRREL
by
Arthur W. Allen
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins,
CO
80526
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington,
DC
20240


This report should be cited as:
Allen,
A.
W.
1982.
Habitat suitability index
models:
fox
squirrel.
U.S.
Dept. Int., Fish Wildl. Servo FWS/OBS-82/10.18.
11 pp.


PREFACE
This document is part of the Habitat Suitability Index (HSI) Model Series
(FWS/OBS-82/l0) , which provides habitat information useful
for impact assess-
ment
and
habitat
management.
Several
types
of
habitat
information
are
provided.
The Habitat Use Information Section is largely constrained to those
data that can be used to derive quantitative relationships between key environ-
mental variables and habitat suitability.
The habitat use information provides
the foundation for HSI models that follow.
In addition, this same information
may be useful in the development of other models more appropriate to specific
assessment or evaluation needs.
The HSI Model Section documents a habitat model and information pertinent
to its application.
The model synthesizes the habitat use information into a
framework appropriate for field application and is scaled to produce an index
value between 0.0 (unsuitable habitat) and 1.0 (optimum habitat).
The applica-
tion
information includes descriptions of the geographic ranges and seasonal
app1icati on of the mode 1, its current verifi cati on status,
and ali sti ng of
model variables with recommended measurement techniques for each variable.
In essence, the model presented herein is a hypothesis of species-habitat
relationships and not a statement of proven
cause and effect relationships.
Results of model
performance tests, when available, are referenced.
However,
models that have demonstrated reliability
in
specific
situations
may
prove
unreliable in others.
For this reason,
feedback is encouraged from users of
this model concerning improvements and other suggestions that may increase the
utility and effectiveness of this habitat-based approach to fish and wildlife
planning.
Please send suggestions to:
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
2625 Redwing Road
Ft. Collins,
CO
80526
iii


CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE
iii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
v
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
1
Genera1
1
Food ............................................................•.
1
Water
1
Cover
1
Reproduction
2
Interspersion.....................................................
2
Special Considerations............................................
2
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL
3
Model Applicability
3
Model Description.................................................
3
Model Relationships
6
Appl ication of the Model
8
SOURCES OF OTHER MODELS
9
REFERENCES
9
iv


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge F. S. Barkalow and C. M. Nixon for their review
of this habitat model.
Word
processing was provided
by Carolyn
Gulzow and
Dora Ibarra.
Cover ill ustration is by Larry We10 and ori gi nally appeared
; n
Mount Rainier's Mammals.
v


FOX SQUIRREL (Sciurus niger)
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
General
The fox squirrel
(Sciurus niger)
is the largest of
the North American
tree squirrels.
The species is widely distributed throughout eastern North
American and has been introduced in many portions of the West (Wright 1979).
Fox squirrels also have expanded their range westward through utilization of
gallery forest habitats along major river drainages (Armstrong
1972; Wright
1979).
Food
Foods
consumed
by the
fox
squirrel
include mast,
tree buds,
insects,
tubers, bulbs, roots, pird eggs, and the seeds of spring fruiting trees (Lowery
1974).
Winter
foods
are
chiefly
mast
produced
by
oaks
(Quercus
spp.),
hickories
(Carya
spp.),
American
beech
(Fagus
grandifolia),
magnolias
(Magnoliaceae spp.),
gums
(Hamamelidaceae spp.), and dogwoods (Cornus spp.).
Agricul tura 1 crops such as corn, soybeans, oats, wheat,
and frui t
crops are
also readily eaten by the fox squirrel (Brown and Yeager 1945).
Water
Succulent vegetation normally satisfies the moisture requirements of fox
squirrels (Allen 1943; McConnell, pers.
comm.).
Water may be utilized when
present;
however, the lack of it is not a limiting habitat factor for the fox
squirrel (U.S. Forest Service 1971).
Cover
Although fox squirrels inhabitat a wide variety of forest types, they are
most abundant in open forest stands with little understory vegetation (Taylor
1974).
Ideal habitat is comprised of small stands of large trees interspersed
with
agricultural
lands.
Optimal fox squirrel habitat in Michigan was small
units of mature oak-hickory woodland connected by small
wooded strips that
served as
travel
lanes for squirrels (Allen 1943).
Fox squirrel habitat in
Ohio
consisted
of
small,
2
to
121.4 ha
(5
to
300 acres)
farm
woodlots
(Baumgartner 1943).
Fox
squirrels
use
leaf nests or tree cavities for shelter and litter
rearing (Baumgartner 1943).
However, they appear to use leaf nests more often
1


than do gray squirrels (S.
carolinensis) (Bakken 1952 cited by Taylor 1974;
Donohoe and Beal 1972).
Fox squirrels in Ohio utilized one to three shelters
in their territory, at least one of which was a tree cavity (Donohoe and Beal
1972).
Hickories, white oak (Quercus alba), scarlet oak (Q. coccinea), and beech
were the most frequently selected trees for construction of leaf nests in West
Virginia, Ohio, and Illinois (Sanderson et al. 1980).
The presence of grape-
vines
(Vitus
spp.)
in
a tree
increased the
likelihood of the trees being
selected----as-a leaf nest site.
Based
on the
average
number
of
leaf
nests
constructed by a fox squirrel per year, it appears that four to six canopy-
reaching grapevines per hectare (1.5 to 2.3/acre) provide an adequate number
of leaf nest anchorages.
Trees containing
summer and winter leaf nests in
Ohio averaged 37.8 cm (15.1 inches) dbh and 32.8 cm (13.1 inches) dbh, respec-
tively (Baumgartner 1939).
Sassafras (Sassafras albidum), sugar maple (Acer saccharum), elm (Ulmus
spp.),
and beech contained
a significantly greater
proportion
of
suitable
cavities
than
expected
on the basis of their abundance in Illinois (Nixon
et al.
1980).
In contrast, walnut
(Juglans
spp.)
and white
oak contained
significantly fewer cavities than expected.
Den trees in Ohio had an average
dbh of 53 cm (21.2 inches) and were an average of 50.9 m (58.6 yd)
from the
nearest woodland border (Baumgartner 1939).
Eighty-eight percent of the den
trees in eastern Texas had an average dbh of 30 cm (12 inches) or more (Baker
1944).
Reproduction
The
reproductive
requirements
of
the
fox
squirrel
are
assumed
to
be
identical with cover requirements, as described above.
Interspersion
The home range of the fox squirrel in the Southeast is normally from 2 to
4 ha (5 to 10 acres) (U.S. Forest Service 1971).
The mean home range size for
male and female fox squirrels in Nebraska was 7.56 ha (18.7 acres) and 3.55 ha
(8.8 acres), respectively (Adams 1976).
A positive relationship exists between
fox squirrel home range size and the area of the inhabited woodlot or forest
stand
(Adams 1976; Nixon
pers.
comm.).
Adult female fox squirrels are more
sedentary than are adult males or subadults (Nixon et al.
1980).
Therefore,
adult females are more susceptible to habitat changes that affect the avail-
ability of denning sites and food.
Special Considerations
Fox
and gray
squi rre1 ranges
overl ap throughout
most of
the
eastern
United
States
(Bakken
1952 cited by Taylor 1974).
Coexi stence of
the
two
species is most evident in the western and northern portions of the ranges of
both species (Bakken 1952 cited by Taylor 1974).
Although the two species may
inhabit the same general area, they tend to concentrate in slightly different
habi tats.
Fox squi rre1s prefer open woodl and habitats; gray squi rre1s typi-
cally inhabit large dense stands of
hardwoods
with
dense
understory
cover
2


(Taylor 1974).
Gray squirrels in Texas were more
common
in
poorly drained
1owl and areas,
whereas
fox
squi rre1s were more
frequently
associ ated
with
upland and well
drained bottomland habitats
(Goodrum 1938).
Differences in
habitat preference and foraging behavior are reflected
in
foods
eaten.
Fox
squirrels
in Missouri
commonly inhabit open forests, forest edges, woodlots,
and fence rows, where oak-hickory mast (52.2% of the annual diet) is supple-
mented
wi th
corn
and other
foods
common 1y associ ated
with
these
habitats
(Korschgen 1981).
Gray squirrels
occupy dense
forests
with
nearly
closed
canopies and abundant ground cover and rely more heavily on oak-hickory mast
(73.3% of annual diet) than do fox squirrels.
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL
Model Applicability
Geographic area.
This model appears to be most applicable in the ranges
of
the
following
subspecies
of
the
fox
squirrel:
s.n.
rufiuenter,
s.n.
vu1pinus,
~.!!. 1udovicianus,
and
~.!!.
1imitis (Barka1ow-pers.
comm.).
Sub-
species
inhabiting
the
Outer
Coastal
Plain
Forest
and Southeastern
Mixed
Forest Provi nces (Bai1 ey 1980) appear to have suffi ci ent1y different habitat
requirements to justify separate or modified habitat mode1(s).
Season.
This model will
produce HSI values for year-round habitat needs
of the fox squirrel.
Cover types.
This model is intended to evaluate fox squirrel habitat in
the following cover types (terminology follows that of U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service
1981):
Deciduous
Forest
(OF);
Deciduous
Tree
Savanna
(DTS);
and
Deciduous Forested Wetland (DFW).
Minimum habitat area.
Minimum habitat
area
is
defined as the
minimum
amount of contiguous habitat that is required before an area will be occupied
by a species.
This information, as it pertains to the fox squirrel, was not
found in the literature.
The home range of the fox squirrel has been reported
to
range
from 2 to
8 ha (5 to 20 acres).
It is assumed that, if less than
2 ha (5 acres) of potentially suitable habitat
is
available,
the
HSI
will
equal 0.0.
Verification level.
This
model
was
reviewed
by F.S.
Barkalow,
North
Carolina
State
University,
and C.M.
Nixon,
Illinois
Institute
of
Natural
Resources.
Improvements suggested by these revi ewers were incorporated into
this model.
Model Description
Overview.
This HSI model
for the fox squirrel considers the quality of
life requisites for the species in each cover type.
Winter food and Cover/
reproduction are the only life requisites considered in this model.
The following sections document the logic and assumptions used to trans-
late habitat information for the fox squirrel into the variables and equations
3


used in the HSI model.
Specifically, these sections cover:
(1) identification
of variables used in the model; (2) definition and justification of the suit-
ability levels of each variable; and (3) description of the assumed relation-
ships between variables.
Figure 1 illustrates the relationships of habitat variables, life requi-
sites, and cover types for the fox squirrel.
Food component.
A wide variety of vegetative and animal materials may be
consumed
by the
fox
squirrel
during
the spring,
summer,
and fall.
Winter
foods are comprised almost wholly of hard mast and grain.
It is assumed that
the availability of winter food will
be the most limiting component of the
food requirements of the fox squirrel.
The winter food value for the fox squirrel
is a funttion
of
hard mast
production and,
to a lesser extent, the availability of grain.
Optimum food
can be supplied by hard mast;
however,
grain availability
may be extremely
important during years of little or no mast production.
It is assumed that
the potential for optimum mast production will occur where a mix of white and
red oaks, hickories, walnuts, and other mast producing trees comprise at least
40% of the total
canopy cover of the forest or stand.
Mast produci ng trees
should equal or exceed 25.4 cm (10 inches) dbh to provide optimum mast produc-
tion.
As tree canopy closure increases above 60%, mast quality and quantity
is
reduced due to
suppressi on and shadi ng of tree crowns by adjacent trees.
It also is assumed that grain within 200 m (220 yds) of a forest or stand will
have optimal
value as
a supplement to the winter diet of the fox squirrel.
Available grain in excess of 200 m (220 yds) will have a lower potential as a
supplement.
The winter diet of fox squirrels will never be completely limited
by the absence of a source of grain.
It is assumed that potential mast produc-
tion is at least three times as important in supplying winter food for the fox
squirrel as is the availability of grain.
Cover and Reproductive Component.
Fox squirrels inhabitat a variety of
forest
types.
However,
they
are most abundant
in
open forest
stands with
sparse understory vegetation.
Although fox squirrels commonly
utiliz~ leaf nests for shelter and litter
rearing,
the
presence
of
tree
cavities
will
increase
the
quality
of
the
habitat.
It is assumed that the physical
structure of a forest
stand is an
i ndicati on of the avail abil ity of tree cavi ties.
Forest stands domi nated by
mature to overmature trees are assumed to provide cavities and a sufficient
number of sites for leaf nests to meet the cover requirements of the species.
Overstory trees which have an average dbh of 38.1 cm (15 inches) or larger are
assumed to
provide
adequate
cover
and
reproductive
habitat.
Optimum tree
canopy closure is assumed to range from 20 to 60%.
A canopy closure of less
than
20% will
indicate less suitable habitat, as will tree density exceeding
60%.
Understory vegetation comprised of shrubs may decrease habitat qual ity
for the fox squirrel.
Optimum conditions are assumed to occur whenihe shrub
crown closure is
30% or
less.
Habitat quality will
decrease as
the
shrub
density increases above 30%, regardless of tree canopy closure and overstory
size.
A shrub density of 100% is assumed to be indicative of habitat with no
suitability for fox squirrels.
4


Habitat variables
Li fe
regu i sites
Cover tYpes
Distance to available grain
Percent canopy closure of trees
that produce hard mast (e.g.,
oak, hickory, walnut,
pecan,
beech) which are greater
than or equal to 25.4 cm
(10 inches) dbh
-------HSI
Deciduous Forest
Deciduous Tree
Savanna
Deciduous Forested
Wet Iand
Wi nter food
Cover and
reproduction
dbh of overstory t~re::
tree canopy closure ----------:::::~
shrub crown cover
Pe rcent
Average
Percent
U1
Figure 1.
The relationship of habitat variables, life requisites,
and cover types to the HSI for the fox squirrel.


Model Relationships
Suitability Index (SI) curves for habitat variables.
This section
contains suitability index graphs that illustrate the habitat relationships
described in the previous section.
Cover
~
DF,DTS,
DFW
Variable
Percent canopy closure
of trees that produce
hard mast (e.g., oak,
hickory, walnut, pecan,
beech)
~ 25.4 cm
(10 inches) dbh.
><
OJ
"'0.= 0.8
~
.... 0.6
........
.0
~0.4
....
::::l
V) 0.2
25
50
%
75
100
DF, DTS ,DFW
Distance to available
grain.
6
1. 0 -t---.+-...........-..---L-..........+
><
OJ-g 0.8
.....
~0.6
........
.....
.0
10 0.4
~....
::::l
V) 0.2
200
400
600
800 (m)
220
440
660
880 (yd)


DF,DTS,
DFW
DF,DTS,
DFW
Average dbh of
overstory trees.
Percent tree canopy
closure.
1.0
X
QJ
-g 0.8
......
~
.,.. 0.6
,...
.,..
.0s 0.4
.,..
:::s
(/) 0.2
1.0
X
QJ
-g 0.8
......
~0.6
.,..
,...
.,..
.0
~ 0.4
12.5
25.0
37.5
50.8 (em)
5
10
15
20
(in)
25
50
%
75
100
DF,DTS,
DFW
Percent shrub crown
cover.
1.0
~-g 0.8
......
~0.6
.,..
,...
.,..
.0
ltl 0.4
~
.,..
:::s(/)0.2
7
25
50
%
75
100


Equations.
In order to obtain life requisite values for the fox squirrel,
the
SI
values
for
appropriate
variables must be combined with the use of
equations.
A discussion and explanation of the assumed relationships between
variables was included under Model Description.
The suggested equations for
obtaining the food and cover/reproduction values are presented in Figure 2.
Li fe requi sHe
Winter food
Cover/reproduction
Cover type
DF ,DTS ,DFW
DF ,DTS ,DFW
Equations
Figure 2.
Equations for determining life requisite values
by cover type for the fox squirrel.
HSI determination.
A HSI value for a single cover type species is based
on the limiting factor concept and equals the lowest life requisite value.
Application of the Model
Definitions of variables and suggested field measurement techniques (Hays
et al. 1981) are presented in Figure 3.
Variable [definition]
Percent canopy closure
of trees that produce
hard mast (e.g., oak,
hickory, walnut, pecan,
beech)
~ 25.4 cm (10 inches)
dbh [the percent of the
ground that is shaded
by the vertical projec-
tion of the canopies of
trees which produce a
hard shelled fruit and
have a dbh of at least
25.4 cm (10 inches)].
Cover types
DF,DTS ,DFW
Suggested technique
Calculated area of
plant using crown
diameter on strip
quadrat
Figure 3.
Definitions of variables and suggested measurement techniques.
8


Variable [definition}
Distance to available grain
[the linear distance from
sample point to grain crops
that are available to fox
squirrels.
Grain may be
available as standing crop,
waste, or stored grain].
Average dbh of overstory
trees [the average
diameter at breast height
(1.4 m/4.5 ft) of those
trees which are
~ 80
percent of the height
of the tallest tree
in the stand.
Percent tree canopy
closure [the percent
of the ground surface
shaded by a vertical
projection of the
canopies of all woody
vegetation greater
than 5.0 m (16.5 ft)
ta11].
Percent shrub crown
cover [the percent of
the ground shaded by
a vertical projec-
tion of the canopies
of woody vegetation
less than 5 m (16.5 ft)
ta11] .
Cover types
DF,DTS,DFW
DF ,DTS ,DFW
DF,DTS,DFW
DF,DTS,DFW
Suggested technigue
On site inspection,
remote sensing
Cruise for tallest tree
in stand.
Sample with
optical range finder
and Biltmore stick on
strip quadrat
Li ne intercept,
remote sensing
Li ne intercept
Figure 3.
(concluded)
SOURCES OF OTHER MODELS
Numerical habitat models by Flood et al. (1977) and Hallett (1980) were
located in the literature.
REFERENCES
Adams, C. E.
1976.
Measurements and characteristics of fox squirrel, Sciurus
niger rufiventer, home ranges.
Am. Midl. Nat. 95(1):211-215.
9


Allen,
D. L.
1943.
Michigan fox squirrel
management.
Michigan Dept. of
Conserv., Game Div. Publ. 100.
404 pp.
Armstrong, D.
M.
1972.
Distribution of mammals in Colorado.
University of
Kansas.
Lawrence, Kansas.
415 pp.
Bailey,
R.
G.
1980.
Description of the ecoregions of the
United States.
U.S.D.A. For. Servo Misc. Publ. 1391.
77 pp.
Baker,
R.
H.
1944.
An ecological
study of tree squirrels in eastern Texas.
J. Mammal. 25(1):8-24.
Bakken,
A.
1952.
Interre1atonships of Sciurus carolinensis (Gmelin) and
Sciurus niger (Linneaus)
in mixed populations.
Ph.D. Thesis., Univ.
Wisc.,
.
188pp.
Cited by Taylor 1974.
Barkalow, F. S., Jr.
Personal communication.
Zoology Dept., North
Car~lina
State Univ., Raleigh.
Baumgartner, L. L.
1939.
Fox squirrel dens.
J. Mammal. 20(4):456-465.
1943.
Fox squirrels in Ohio. J. Wi1d1. Manage. 7(2):193-202.
Brown,
L. G., and L. E. Yeager.
1945.
Fox and gray squirrels in Illinois.
Illinois Nat. Hist. Surv. Bull. 23(5):449-532.
Donohoe, R. W., and R. O. Beal.
1972.
Squirrel behavior determined by radio
telemetry.
Ohio Dept. Nat. Resour., Fish and Wildl. Rep. 2.
20 pp.
Flood, B. S.,
M. E. Sangster,
R.
D. Sparrowe, and T. S. Baskett.
1977.
A
handbook for habitat evaluation procedures.
U.S.D.I. Fish Wildl. Servo
Res. Publ. 132. Washington, D.C.
77 pp.
Goodrum,
P.
1938.
Squirrel
management in eastern Texas.
Trans.
N.
Am.
Wildl. Conf. 3:670-676.
Hays, R. L.,
C.
Summers, and W. Seitz.
1981.
Estimating wildlife habitat
variables.
U.S.D.I. Fish and Wildl. Servo
FWS/OBS-81/77.
111 pp.
Hallett,
D.
L.
1980.
Fox squirrel (Sciurus niger).
Pages 42-48 i!! T. S.
Baskett, D. A. Darrow, O. L. Hallett, M. J. Armbruster, J.
A. Ellis, B.
F. Sparrowe, and P. A. Koste, eds.
A handbook for terrestrial habitat
evaluation
in central Missouri.
U.S.D.l.
Fish and Wildl.
Servo
Res.
Publ. 133. Washington, D. C.
155 pp.
Korschgen,
L. J.
1981.
Foods of fox and gray squi rre1sin Mi ssouri.
J.
Wi1d1. Manage. 45(1):260-266.
Lowery, G. H., Jr.
1974.
The mammals of Louisiana and its adjacent waters.
Louisiana State Univ. Press, Baton Rouge.
565 pp.
10


MacClintock,
D.
1970.
Squirrels of North America.
Van Nostrand Reinhold
Co., New York.
184 pp.
McConnell,
C.
A.
Personal
communication (letter dated 21 November 1978),
Wildlife Management Institute, Washington, D.C.
Nixon, C.
M.
Personal communication (letter dated 2 October 1981).
Illinois
Inst. Nat. Resour., Champaign, Ill.
Nixon, C. M., S. P. Havera, and L. P. Hansen.
1980.
Initial
response of
squirrels to forest changes associated with selection cutting.
Wildl.
Soc. Bull. 8(4):298-306.
Sanderson, H. R., C. M. Nixon, R. W. Donohoe, and L. P. Hansen.
1980.
Grape-
vines - an important component of gray and fox squirrel habitat.
Wildl.
Soc. Bull. 8(4):307-310.
Taylor, G. J.
1974.
Present status and habitat survey of the Delmarva fox
squirrel (Sciurus niger cinereus) with a discussion of reasons for its
decline.
Proc.
Southeastern
Assoc.
Game
and
Fish
Commissioners
27:278-289.
u.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service.
1981.
Standards for the development of
habitat suitability index models.
103 ESM.
U.S.D.l.
Fish Wildl.
Serv.,
Div. Ecol. Servo
n.p.
U.S. Forest Service.
1971.
Wildlife habitat management handbook.
Southern
Region. U.S.D.A. For. Servo FSH 2609.23.
n.p.
Wright, G.
M.
1979.
Range extension of the fox squirrel
in southeastern
Washingtqn and into adjacent Idaho.
Murrelet 60(2):73-75.
11


,
I 3. Recipient's ACCHsion No.
I
!5. RePOrt Dete
!
July 1982
I~
REPORT DOCUMENTATION 11. REPORT NO.
PAGE
" - FWS/OBS-82/10. 18
7. ",uthor(s)
Arthur W. A11 en
4. Title and SubtItle
50272 -, 01
Habitat Suitability Index Models:
Fox Squirrel
I~
1---------------------.------------ tl-------------1
11. Contnet(C) or Grsnt(G) No.
I (e)
I(a,
I
113. Type of Report & Perlod Covered
I
Habitat Eva1uati on Procedures Group' 10. Praiec:t/T.sk/Worll Unit No.
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, Colorado
80526
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
W~~h;nntnn
nr.
?O?L1.0
1~ Spansorin. 0rKanizatlon Neme and Add.....
9. Performin. OrKenization Neme end Add,..••
15. Supplementary Notes
1~ Abstract (Limit: 200 words)
Habitat preferences and species characteristics of the fox squirrel (Sciurus niger)
are described in this publication.
It is one of a series of Habitat Suitability
Index (HSI) models and was developed through an analysis of available scientific
data on the species-habitat requirements of the fox squirrel.
Habitat use infor-
41
mation is presented in a review of the literature, followed by the development of
~
a HSI model.
The model is presented in three formats:
graphic, word, and mathe-
matical.
Suitability index graphs quantify the species-habitat relationship.
These
data are then synthesized into a model which is designed to provide information for
use in impact assessment and habitat management activities.
17. Document An.lysis
a.
Deserlpto~
Wildlife
Animal behavior
Animal ecology
Habi tabi 1i ty
Mathematical models
b.
Identifiers/Open·Ended Terms
Fox squi rrel
Sciurus niger
Habitat suitability
Habitat preference
Mammals
Squirrels
Habitat management
Habitat suitability index models
Habitat requirements
Species-habitat relationships
Impact assessment
c. COSATI
Field/Group
18. Availability Statement
Unlimited
, 19. Security Class (This Report)
UNCLASS IFIED
-,
20. Sm:/Ct,n7SSsIFrEDa•
el
i 21. No. of Paces
~
:i i-v + 11
nn
I
-=--
: 22.
Price
~ U.S. Government Printing Office
1982 -
580-611/411 Reg. 8
(S•• ANSI-Z39.181
s•• InstructIons on Rever••
OPTIONAL FORM 272 (4-171
(Formerly NTl5-351
Oepartment 0' Commerce


692
REGION 7
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1011 E. Tudor Road
Anchorage, Alaska 99503


DEPARTMENT OF THE I
u.s. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
I ', So
tIMI ... ""'IUM .••·• •
.... H\/K·.:
~
",
'
'.
,.+.#
...--...... ,..' ,-
As the Nation'. principal conservation aleney, the Department of the Interior hal respon-
sibility for most of our .nationally owned public lands and nltural resources. Thil includel
fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources, protecting our fish and wildlife,
preservinl th&environmental and cultural values of our national parks and hlstorlca' places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life throulh outdoor recreation. The Department II-
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to assure that their development is in
the best interests of all our people. The Department 1150 hal a major responsibility for
American Indian reservation cOf11munitiel and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. administration.
