--- 
source: hsi-042.pdf
--- 

·.
NATIONAL WETLANDS
RESEARCH CENTER LIBRARY
700 Cajundome Blvd.
Lafayette, LA. 70506-3152
FWS/OBS-82/10.42
APRIL 1983
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
SOUTHERN RED-BACKED VOLE
(WESTERN UNITED STATES)
, .
SK
361
.U54
no.82-
10.42
Fish and Wildlife Service
'\
U.S. Department of the Interior


, .
This model is designed to be used by the Division of Ecological Services
in conjunction with the Habitat Evaluation Procedures.
I
.


FWS/OBS-82/10.42
April 1983
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
SOUTHERN RED-BACKED VOLE
(WESTERN UNITED STATES)
by
Arthur W. Allen
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wilulife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2627 Redwing Road
Fort Collins,
CO
80526-2899
, .
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Division of Biological Services
Research and Development
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington,
DC 20240


This report should be cited as:
Allen,
A.
W.
1983.
Habitat
suitability
index
models:
Southern
red-backed
vole
(Western
United
States).
U.S.
Dept.
Int.,
Fish
Wildl.
Servo
FWS/OBS-821l0. 42.
14 pp.


PREFACE
This document is part of the Habitat Suitability Index (HSI) Model Series
(FWS/OBS-82/10), which provides habitat information useful
for impact assess-
ment
and
habitat
management.
Several
types
of
habitat
information
are
provided.
The Habitat Use Information Section is largely constrained to those
data that can be used to derive quantitative relationships between key environ-
mental variables and habitat suitability.
The habitat use information provides
the foundation for HSI models that follow.
In addition, this same information
may be useful
in the development of other models more appropriate to
specific
assessment or evaluation needs.
The HSI Model Section documents a habitat model and information pertinent
to its application.
The model synthesizes the habitat use
information into a
framework appropriate for field application and is scaled to produce an index
value between 0.0 (unsuitable habitat) and 1.0 (optimum habitat).
The applica-
tion
information includes descriptions of the geographic ranges and seasonal
application of the model, its current verification status,
and a listing
of
model variables with recommended measurement techniques for each variable.
In essence, the model presented herein is a hypothesis of species-habitat
relationships and not a statement
of
proven
cause
and effect relationships.
Results of model
performance tests, when available, are referenced.
However,
models that
have demonstrated reliability
in
specific situations
may
prove
unreliable
in others.
For this reason,
feedback is encouraged from users of
this model concerning improvements and other suggestions that may increase the
utility and effectiveness of this habitat-based approach to fish and wildlife
planning.
Please send suggestions to:
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and -Wildlife Service
2627 Redwing Road
Ft. Collins,
CO
80526-2899
iii


CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE
iii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
v
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
1
Genera1
1
Food
1
Water
2
Cover
2
Reproduction
:
'.:..
3
Interspersion.....................................................
3
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL
,
4
Model Applicability...............................................
4
Model Descrfption
4
Model Relationships...............................................
7
Appli catfon of the Model..........................................
9
SOURCES OF OTHER MODELS
11
REFERENCES
11
fv


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Chris
Maser,
Forestry
Sciences
Laboratory,
Corvallis,
Oregon,
and
Douglas C. Ure,
Department
of
Zoology
and
Entomology,
Colorado
State
University,
Ft.
Collins,
Colorado,
provided
valuable
critiques
of
earlier
drafts of the HSI
model
for the
southern red-backed vole.
Sara Johnson, U.S.
Forest
Service,
Bozeman,
Montana,
also
reviewed
the
HSI
model
and
provided
unpublished data pertaining to the southern red-backed vole.
The comments and
suggestions of these individuals added significantly to
the quality of this
HSI model,
and their contributions are gratefully acknowledged.
The cover of
this
document
was
illustrated
by Jennifer
Shoemaker.
Word
processing
was
provided by Carolyn Gulzow and Dora Ibarra.
, .
v


SOUTHERN RED-BACKED VOLE (Clethrionomys ~~)
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
General
The distribution of the
southern
red-backed vole (Clethrionomys
~peri)
coincides closely with the boreal
and montane forest
biomes throughout North
America (Merritt 1981).
The species occupies a wide range of plant communities
but
tends
to
be
most
common
in wooded cover types (Clark 1973).
Red-backed
voles generally do not inhabit fields,
forest clearings,
or ot he r
non f ore s t ed
habitats unless an abundance of protective ground cover is present (Miller and
Getz 1972).
Food
Eastern subspecies of the red-backed vole are more dependent on herbaceous
vegetation
and
insects
as
a
food
source
than
western
subspecies,
which are
highly dependent
on fungi,
primarily hypogeous ectomycorrhizae (Maser et al.
1978a,
b;
Ure
and Maser 1982).
Vascul ar vegetat i on accounted for over
64~~ of
the
food
of
red-backed
voles
in
North
Carolina
(Linzey
and
Linzey
1973).
Fungi
comprised 0.2% of the diet of the red-backed vole.
Lichens and epigeous
fungi
(mushrooms and puffballs) accounted for 80
to
89% of
the diet
of
the
red-backed vole in Ontario (Martell
1981).
Lichens are a major food source of
western
subspecies of the
red-backed vole (Ure
and
Maser
1982;
Maser,
pers.
comm.).
Red-backed voles will
climb trees
and tunnel
upward through the snow
column to gain access to
lichens growing
on tree boles and
limbs.
The
seeds
of
coni ferous
trees are
a 1so
an
important component of the di et of the red-
backed vole on an annual basis (Merritt and Merritt 1978; Ure, pers. comm.).
A major
food
source
for
western
subspecies
of
the
red-backed
vole
is
hypogeous
fungi
(truffles and false truffles)
(Ure and Maser 1982).
Truffles
are
the
sporocarps,
or
reproductive
bodies,
of
soil
fungi
(mycorrhiza).
Ectomycorrhizal
fungi
form
a
sheath
around plant rootlets
and are essential
for the successful growth of many tree species because they provide
increased
nutrient and water absorption,
rootlet
longevity, and rootlet protection from
pathogens
(Maser
et al.
1978b;
Spurr
and
Barnes
1980).
The
presence
of
mycorrhizae is essential
for successful
growth of tree species on drought and
nutrient
poor sites
(Spurr
and
Barnes
1980).
Pines
(Pinus
spp.)
typically
grow
on
nutrient
poor sites,
are particularly dependent
on
ectomycorrhizal
fungi,
and will
not
grow normally without the association.
Red-backed
voles
1


\
playa positive role in the western coniferous forest
ecosystems because they
disperse
the mycorrhizal
inoculum that is necessary for the establishment and
successful growth of conifers (Maser et a1. 1978a).
Water
Information pertaining to the dietary water requirements of the red-backed
vole were not found in the literature.
However, the lack of soil moisture has
been
reported
to
be
a critical
factor
in
limiting
the distribution
of
the
red-backed vole (Butsch
1954;
Hoffman
1960; Miller 1970; Kirkland and Griffin
1974).
An absence of moisture
in
upland
habitats
in
Connecticut
restricted
red-backed
voles
to
moist,
lowland
habitats
(Miller 1970).
The species was
most abundant in Connecticut at sites within
60 m (65.6 yd) of standing water
or
saturated
soils
(Miller
and
Getz
1973).
Clark
(1973)
reported that the
species
inhabited
the drier sites
in
peripheral
areas
of
mesic
communities
sampled
in
Wyoming.
Mesic
forest
sites
allow
hypogeous
fungi
to fruit for
longer periods of time, thereby providing a more permanent and dependable food
source
for
western
subspecies
of
the
red-backed
vole
(Maser,
pers.
comm.).
Red-backed voles in Wyoming were significantly more abundant in mesic un10gged
and
selectively
cut
forest
stands than
in xeric forest
stands
(Campbe l l
and
Clark 1981).
Soil xerification, resulting from logging activities,' was believ-
ed to
be the cause of a decrease in red-backed vole density.
C1earcutting of
western coniferous forests results in the severe reduction, or elimination, of
red-backed voles due to the loss of ectomycorrhiza1
fungi
(Maser et a1.
1978a;
Ure
and
Maser 1982).
Scott et al.
(1982)
recorded
no
significant
change
in
red-backed
vole
abundance
when
36~~ of
a
40 ha
(100 acres)
subalpine
forest
stand was harvested
in
12 circular c1earcuts,
each 1.2 ha (3 acres)
in size.
Water provided
by
food may furnish sufficient moisture to allow distribution
of the red-backed vole in drier, upland habitats (Miller and Getz 1973).
Cover
The
red-backed vole most
frequently
inhabits
mesic
areas within
conif-
erous,
deciduous,
and mixed forests that contain an abundance of debris cover
(Merritt
1981).
The
species
normally
avoids
nonforested
situations
(Miller
and
Getz
1972),
although winter use of grassland habitats
has
been reported
(Iverson and Turner 1972).
Western
subspecies
of
red-backed
voles
are
more
restricted
in
terms
of
their
habitat
requirements
than
are
their
eastern
counterparts (Ure,
pers.
comm.).
The
southern
red-backed
vole
is
generally
restricted
to
coniferous
forest
habitats
in
western
North
America
because
western
deciduous
forests
do
not
support
enough
ectomycorrhiza1
fungi.
In
western North America, the red-backed vole inhabits forests of western redcedar
(Thuja
p1icata),
hemlock
(Tsug~ spp.),
Douglas fir
(Pseudotsuga menziesii),
spruce (Picea spp.), fir
(Abies spp.),
and
krummho1z and willow (Salix spp.)
communities
(Merritt
1981).
Ponderosa
pine
(Pinus
ponderosa)
stands,
char-
acteristically xeric
in nature,
are not usually inhabited by red-backed voles
(Maser,
pers.
comm.;
Ure,
pers.
comm.).
Rickard
(1960)
reported
that
red-
backed voles were associated with coniferous forests
in Washington and
Idaho
and were most often
captured
in
the
more
dense
portions
of
the
understory,
particularly
near
fallen
logs.
The highest densities of southern
red-backed
2


voles
in
a Colorado
study were
in coniferous,
subalpine
forest
containing
a
forb
and
shrub
(Vacci~ium spp.) understory (Armstrong 1977).
Red-backed voles
usually inhabit western coniferous forest cover types with
shrub understories
bf Vaccinium (e.g., blueberry and whortleberry) (Maser, pers.
comm.).
Forests
with understory vegetation of grasses and
sedges
(Carex
spp.)
supported
the
lowest
densities
of
red-backed
voles.
Johnson
Cf~i82)
found
the
greatest
number of red-backed voles
in
an
Idaho study
in
ungrazed riparian vegetative
communities
with
forb
understories.
No
red-backed
voles
were
captured
in
ungrazed riparian communities where grasses were the major constituents of the
understory
vegetation.
Clark
(1973)
reported
that
the
greatest
numbers
of
red-backed voles in habitats dominated
by quaking
aspen
(Pop~~
tremuloid~~)
were captured where there was a closed tree canopy and an understory of shrubs
and herbs.
"
Several studies have reported a positive correlation between the abundance
of
red-backed
voles
and
an
accumu l a t i on
of debris,
consisting
of
downfall,
rotting logs, brush piles, stumps, root wads,
and
loose litter (Williams
1955;
Gunderson
1959; Miller and
Getz
1973;
Beach
1975;
Lovejoy
1975;
Maser et al.
1978b;
Merritt
1981).
There
is
a direct
positive
relationship
between
the
number
of
rotting
logs
and
red-backed
vole
abundance
(Maser" et 'al .
1981).
Communities
with
a debris
cover greater
than
25~~ were
reported
to
support
three
times
as
many
red-backed
voles
in
Vermont
as
sites
with
less
ground
cover (Miller and Getz 1973).
Logs not only provide shelter for the red-backed
vole,
but
may
also· serve
as
beds
for
the
establishment
and
growth
of
mycorrhizal
fungi
(Ure,
pers.
comm.).
The
organic
components
of
soil
in
a
mature Douglas-fir/larch (Larix occidental is) forest type in Montana were the
most important substrates for ectomycorrhizae formation
(Harvey et al.
1976).
Sixty-six
percent
of all
active
ectomycorrhizae
were
associated with
humus,
while
21%
and
8% were
in
decayed
wood
and
charcoal,
respectively.
Mineral
soil contained only 5% of all active ectomycorrhizae.
Martell (1981) attribut-
ed a decline in red-backed vole numbers in clear cut areas of northern Ontario
to reduced vegetative cover, extremes in daily temperatures, and soil xerifica-
tion.
These changes
in microhabitat characteristics were believed
to
result
in
the
species becoming rare to absent within
2 to
3 years
following
timber
harvest due to
a reduction
in the availability of
lichens
and
fungi.
Maser
et al.
(1978a)
and
Ure (pers.
comm.) attributed the disappearance of western
subspecies of red-backed voles after clearcutting to the absence of an adequate
food
source.
Red-backed voles are absent
from clearcut areas until
hypogeous
fungi
begin
fruiting
again
as
the
trees
reach
the
pole-sapling
stage
(Ure,
pers.
comm.).
However,
eastern
subspecies may reinvade clearcut areas within
3 years,
because they are more dependent
on herbaceous vegetation
than
fungi
as a food source.
Reproduction
The
reproductive
requirements
of
the
red-backed vole are assumed to
be
identical with its cover requirements, as described above.
3


Interspersion
The mean home range size for the red-backed vole in Colorado varied from
0.01
to 0.5 ha (0.02 to 1.25 acres) (Merritt and Merritt 1978).
Maximum and
minimum home ranges for the species in Michigan were 1.4 ha (3.56 acres) and
0.20 ha (0.49 acre), respectively (Blair 1941).
The home ranges of both males
and females overlapped the ranges of other individuals of both sexes.
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL
Model Applicability
Geographic area.
This model
has
been developed
for
application
in the
geographic
ranges
of
western
subspecies
of
the
southern
red-backed
vole
(Fig. 1).
Figure 1.
Geographic applicability of red-backed vole HSI model.
Season.
This model was developed
to
evaluate the
potential
quality of
year-round habitat for the southern red-backed vole.
Cover types.
This model was developed to evaluate the potential quality
of southern red-backed vole habitat in the following cover types (terminology
follows that of U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service 1981):
Evergreen Forest (EF);
Deciduous Forest (OF); and Evergreen Shrubland (ES).
4


Minimum habitat area.
Minimum
habitat
area
is
defined
as
the
mt rnmum
amount of contiguous habitat that is-required before an area will
be occupied
by a species.
Information on the minimum habitat area for the southern red-
backed vole was not located in the literature.
However, red-backed vole
home
range
size
has
been
reported
to
vary
from
0.01 ha
to
1.4 ha
(0.02
to
3.56 acres).
Based on this information, it is
assumed that at
least 2.0 ha
(5 acres) of potentially suitable habitat must be present before an area will
be occupied by the species.
If less than 2.0 ha (5 acres) of forested habitat
is present, the HSI for the red-backed vole is assumed to be 0.0.
Verification level.
An earlier draft of this model was reviewed by Sara
Johnson,
U.S.
Forest
Service,
Gallatin
National
Forest,
Bozeman,
Montana;
Chri s Maser,
Forestry
Sci ences Laboratory, Corva 11 is, Oregon;
and Dougl as C.
Ure,
Department of
Zoology
and
Entomology,
Colorado State
University,
Fort
Collins, Colorado.
Improvements and modifications suggested by these reviewers
were incorporated into this model.
Model Description
, -
Although other cover types may be inhabited at low population densities,
optimum year-round habitat requirements of western subspecies of the southern
red-backed vole are
met only within
evergreen
forests.
It
is
assumed
that
food
and cover requirements are interdependent
charact~ristics of the vole's
habitat.
It is also assumed that the spatial distribution of resources within
evergreen forests is not an important consideration
in evaluation of habitat
for the southern red-backed vole.
The following sections provide a documentation of the logic and assump-
tions
used
to translate habitat
information
for
the
red-backed
vole to the
variables and equations used
in
the HSI model.
Specifically, these
sections
cover:
(1) identification
of
variables;
(2) definition
and justification
of
the suitability levels of each variable;
and (3) description
of
the
assumed
relationships
between
variables.
Figure 2 illustrates
the
relationships
of
habitat variables, life requisites, and cover types used
in this
model
to
a
habitat suitability value for the western subspecies of the southern red-backed
vole.
5


Habitat variables
Average dbh of
overstory trees
Life
requi sites
Cover types
Percent of ground
surface covered by
downfall
~ 7.6 cm
(3 inches) in
diameter---~Food/Cover---
Percent grass. canopy
cover -------.../
Percent canopy
'closure of ever-
green trees ---./
Evergreen Forest
Deciduous Forest
-- HSI
Evergreen Shrubland
Figure 2.
Relationships of habitat variables, life requisite and 'cov'; types
in the southern red-backed vole model.
Food/cover component.
The highest densities of western subspecies of the
-,
southern
red-backed
vole
are
reported
in
association
with
mature
evergreen
forests.
The major
food of thi s speci es appears to
be
hypogeous
fungi
with
conifer
seeds
and
lichens
also
appearing
in
the diet
during
some
seasons.
Several
studies
have described forest stand conditions that favor
production
of
these
food
items.
The
ava 11 abil i ty
of
hypogeous
fungi
increases
with
increasing
forest
stand
density
and
age,
especially
on
more
mesic
sites.
Downfall,
or debris,
also
increases with forest age and an increase in debris
is believed to be associated with increasing densities of red-backed voles and
is
a characteristic of microhabitats favoring
hypogeous
fungi
growth.
It is
assumed
that
measurements
of
forest
stand
structure
and
composition
can
be
aggregated to reflect the habitat conditions favoring the production of major
food items and cover requirements of the southern red-backed vole.
The dbh of overstory trees,
percent
canopy
closure
of
evergreen
trees,
percent
of
the
ground
surface
covered
by
downfa 11,
and
the
percent
canopy
closure of grass are assumed to be indicators of the ability of a forest stand
to meet the
food
and
cover needs of the southern red-backed vole.
Relatively
dense forest stands with
large diameter
evergreen
trees
potentially
provide
optimum
habitat
for
western
subspecies
of
the
southern
red-backed
vole.
Hypogeous
fungi
are
most
abundant
in
mesic
forest
communities
with
large
diameter
evergreen
trees.
These
fungi
are
relatively uncommon
in the early
successional
stages
of
forest
communities.
Hypogeous
fungi
are
assumed
to
increase
in
abundance duri ng the
pole-sap 1i ng
success i ona 1 stage and
become
most abundant
in mature
and old growth stands.
This
model
assumes
that
the
diameter
at
breast
height
of
dominant,
or
overstory,
trees
in
a
stand
is
correlated with
successional
stage.
Forest stands with
an
average
overstory
6


dbh s 5.0 cm (2.0 inches)
are
assumed to
be shrub-seedling communities that
have almost no value as southern red-backed vole habitat.
The potential
value
of a forest stand as
southern red-backed vole habitat is assumed to increase
as the average dbh of overstory trees increases.
Forest stands with an average
overstory tree dbh
~ 30.4 cm (12.0 inches)
are assumed to
be mature stands,
indicative of optimum habitat conditions.
The percent canopy closure of evergreen trees is assumed to be the most
influential
characteristic
of
the
potential
of
a
forest
stand
to
provide
suitable conditions for
western
subspecies
of
the
southern
red-backed
vole.
Forest stands with optimum tree diameters
~ 30.4 cm (12.0 inches), have greater
potential
as
red-backed
vole
habitat
as
evergreen
tree
density
increases.
Sparse,
open stands
and stands
dominated by deciduous
trees
are of minimum
value as
red-backed
vole habitat,
even
when
the
mean dbh of
the
stand
is
optimum.
Conversely,
stands of
small
diameter trees
have greater value
as
southern
red-backed
vole
habitat
as
tree
density
increases.
Dense
forest
canopies
tend
to
modify
extremes
in
daily
temperatures
and maintain
mesic
microenvironments
on the
forest
floor.
It
is
assumed
that
optimum
canopy
closure of evergreen trees is
~ 60%.
Canopy closures of evergreen trees
~ 20%
have minimum value.
Forest stands composed mainly of deciduous' tree
species
will
be
of
little
value
as
southern
red-backed
vole habitat,
even
though
overstory tree dbh,
the amount of downfall
present and the canopy closure of
grasses are of optimum value.
As the proportion of a forest stand composed of
evergreen trees
increa~es, the potential of the stand to provide suitable food
and cover for the southern red-backed vole will also increase.
Woody debris on the forest floor provides southern red-backed voles with
cover and is believed to provide concentrated sources of
hypogeous fungi.
It
is assumed that optimum conditions occur when 20% or more of the forest floor
is
covered
by downed
woody
material
greater
than
7.6 cm
(3.0 inches)
in
diameter.
Forest stands devoid
of
woody debris
are
of
much lower value as
southern red-backed vole habitat.
The review of the literature indicated that the southern red-backed vole
inhabits forest stands with an understory of shrubs and/or forbs; however, the
presence
of
grass characterizes
less suitable habitat.
It
is
assumed
that
there is an inverse relationship between grass density and habitat quality for
western subspecies of the southern red-backed vole.
A grass canopy closure of
10% or
1ess is
assumed to
i ndi cate
optimum habi tat
for
the
spec ies ,
whi 1e
grass canopy closures of 80% or greater are assumed
to
represent
unsuitable
southern red-backed vole habitat.
Briefly, optimum habitat for western subspecies of the southern red-backed
vole can be characterized as an evergreen forest stand of large diameter trees
with a canopy closure in excess of 60%, an understory with little to no grass,
and 20% or more of the forest floor covered by woody
debris.
7


Model Relationships
Suitability Index (SI) graphs for habitat variables. This section provides
graphic
representations
of
the
relationship
between
various
conditions
of
habitat variables
and habitat suitability.
The
identification
of
variables
and a written summary of the logic and assumptions used in defining suitability
levels were described in the Model Description section.
Cover
type
EF,DF,ES
EF,DF,ES
Variable
Average dbh of
overstory trees.
Percent of ground
surface covered by
downfall
~ 7.6 cm
(3 inches) in
diameter.
8
x
~ 0.8
c.-.
~0.6
.....
,....
.....
:::l
V1 0.2
x
.Q)
-g 0.8
.-.
»+.)0.6
.....
,....
.....
.D.:g0.4
.....
:::l
V1 0.2
10
4
5
20
8
dbh
10
%
30
12
15
40 (em)
16 (in)
20


/
1.0
EF,DF,E5
VJ
Percent gra ss canopy
cover.
><
QJ
0.8
"0c......
>, 0.6
+->
'r-
r-
'r-
.!:l
0.4
n:J
+->
or-
:::l
0.2
V')
25
50
%
75
100
1.0
EF,DF,E5
V"
Percent canopy
closure of ever-
><
trees.
QJ
0.8
green
"0c......
>, 0.6
+->
r-
'r-
0.4
.!:l
n:J
+->
'r-
:::l 0.2
V')
/
25
50
%
75
100
Equations.
In order
to
obtain
the
food/cover value for the red-backed
vole, the 51 values for appropriate variables must be combined with the use of
an equation.
A discussion and explanation of the assumed relationships between
variables was included under
Model Description
and the
specific
equation
in
this model
was chosen
to mimic these
perceived biological
relationships
as
closely as possible.
The suggested equation for obtaining a food/cover value
for the southern red-backed vole in western evergreen and
deciduou~ forests is
as follows:
9
,/


HSI determination.
Because other life requisites are assumed to
be met
and food/cover
is
t he only life requisite considered in this model,
the HSI
equals the food/cover value.
Application of the Model
Definitions of variables and suggested field measurement techniques (Hays
et al. 1981) are provided in Figure 3.
.
, .
10


Variable (definition)
Average dbh of overstory
trees [the average diam-
eter at breast height
(1.4 m/4.5 ft) of those
trees
~ 80% of the height
of the tallest tree in
the stand].
Percent of the ground
surface covered by down-
fall
~ 7.6 cm (3 inches)
in diameter [the percent
of the ground surface
covered by dead woody
material: including
tree boles, stumps,
limbs, or root wads,
~ 7.6 cm (3 inches)
in diameter].
Percent grass canopy
cover [the percent of
the ground surface
shaded by a vertical
projection of grasses
and/or sedges (Carex
spp.)].
Cover ty~
EF,DF,ES
EF,DF,ES
EF,DF,ES
~gested technique
Cruise for tallest tree
in stand.
Sample with
optical range finder
and Biltmore stick on
strip quadrat.
Line intercept, ocular
estimation of cover
, .
Line intercept, ocular
estimation of cover
/
V~
Percent canopy closure
~f evergreen trees
[the percent of the
ground surface that is
shaded by a vertical
projection of the
canopies of coniferous
woody vegetation taller
than 5.0 m (16.5 ft).]
EF,DF,ES
Line intercept, remote
sensing
Figure 3.
Definition of variables and suggested measurement
techniques.
11
/


SOURCES OF OTHER MODELS
No other habitat models for the southern red-backed vole were located.
REFERENCES
Armstrong,
D. M.
1977.
Ecological distribution of small mammals in the Upper
Williams
Fork
Basin,
Grand
County,
Colorado.
Southwestern
Nat.
22(3):289-304.
Beach,
S.
K.
1975.
Habitat-related
abundance
of
small
mammals
in
the
San
Juan Mountains of Colorado.
M.S. Thesis, Colo. State Univ.,
Ft.
Collins.
74 pp.
8lair,
W.
F.
1941.
Some data on home ranges and general life history of the
short-tailed
shrew,
red-backed
vole,
and
woodland
jumping
mouse
in
northern Michigan.
Am. Midl. Nat. 25:681-685.
Butsch,
R.
S.
1954.
The life
history
and
ecology of
the
red-backed vole,
Clethrionomys
g~J?P~rt gapperi (Vigors),
in Minnesota.
Ph.D.
Ill ss .'," Univ.
Michigan,
Ann
Arbor.
148 pp.
(Abstract only,
from Diss.
Abstr.
Int.
8
Sci. Eng. 14(2):11158, 1975).
Campbell,
T. M.,
and
T.W. Clark.
1981.
Short-term
effects
of
logging
on
red-backed voles and deer mice.
Great 8asin Nat. 40(2):183-189.
Clark,
T.
W.
1973.
microtines,
Grand
33(4):205-217.
Loca1
di stri but i on
and
Teton
National
Park,
interspecies
interactions
in
Wyoming.
Great
Basin
Nat.
-,
\
Gunderson,
H. L.
1959.
Red-backed vole habitat studies in central Minnesota.
J. Mammal. 40(3):405-412.
Harvey,
A. E.,
M. J.
Larsen,
and
M.
F.
Jurgensen.
1976.
Distribution
of
ectomycorrhizae
in
a
mature
Douglas-fir/larch
forest
soil
in
western
Montana.
Forest Sci. 22(4):393-398.
Hays, R. L., C. S. Summers,
and
W. Seitz.
1981.
Estimating wildl ife habitat
variables.
U.S Dept. Int., Fish Wildl. Serv., FWS/OBS-81/47.
111 pp.
Hoffman, G. R.
1960.
The small mammal components of six climax plant associa-
tions in eastern Washington and northern Idaho.
Ecology 41(3):571-572.
Iverson, S. L., and 8.
N.
Turner.
1972.
Winter coexistence of Clethrionomys
gapperi
and
Microtus
pennsylvanicus
in
a grassland
habitat.
Am.
Midl.
Nat. 88(2):440-445.
12


Johnson, S. J.
1982.
Impacts of domestic livestock grazing on small
mammals
of forest grazing allotments
tn. southeastern
Idaho.
Pages 242-250 in J.
M. Peek and P. D. Dalke, eds.
Proc. 10th Wildlife-Livestock Relationships
Symposium.
Kirkland,
G. L., and R. J. Griffin.
1974.
Microdistribution of small mammals
at
the
coniferous-deciduous
forest
ecotone
in
northern
New
York.
J.
Mammal. 55(2):417-427.
Linzey,
D.
W.,
and A.
V.
Linzey.
1973.
Notes on food of small mammals from
Great Smoky Mountains National Park, Tennessee-North Carolina.
J.
Elisha
Mitchell Sci. Soc. 89:6-14.
Lovejoy,
D.
A.
1975.
The effect of logging on small
mammal
populations
in
New England northern hardwoods.
Univ.
Conn.
Occas.
Pap. 8iol.
Sci.
Ser.
2( 17): 269-291.
Martell,
A. M.
1981.
Food habits of southern red-backed voles (Clethrionomys
gapperi) in northern Ontario.
Can. Field-Nat. 95(3):325-328.
Maser,
C.
Personal
communication
(17 January
1983).
Laboratory, Corvallis, Oregon.
Forestry
Sciences
Maser,
C.,
J.
M.
Trappe,
and
R. A.
Nussbaum.
1978a.
Fungal-small
interrelationships with emphasis on Oregon
coniferous
forests.
59(4):779-809.
mammal
Ecology
Maser, C., J.
M.
Trappe,
and D. C. Ure.
1978b.
Implications of small mammal
mycophagy to the management of western coniferous forests.
Trans.
N.
Am.
Wildl. Nat. Resour. Conf. 43:78-88.
Maser,
C.,
B. R.
Mate,
J.
F.
Franklin,
and
C. T.
Dyrness.
1981.
Natural
history of Oregon
coast
mammals.
U.S.
Dept.
Agric.,
For.
Serv.,
Gen.
Tech. Rep. PNW-133.
496 pp.
Merritt, J. F.
1981.
Clethrionomys gapperi.
Mammalian Species 146:1-9.
Merritt,
J. F.,
and
J.
M. Merritt.
1978.
Population
ecology
and
energy
relationships
of Clethrionomys
gapperi
in
a
Colorado
subalpine
forest.
J. Mammal.
59(3):576-598.
Miller,
D.
H.
1970.
An analysis of the local distribution of the red-back
vole,
Clethrionomys
gapperi
(Vigors),
in
northern
Vermont
and
central
Connecticut.
Ph.D.
Diss.,
Univ.
Conn., Storrs.
406 pp.
(Abstract only,
from Diss. Abstr. Int. 8 Sci. Eng. 32(1):240 8, 1971).
Miller, D. H., and L. L. Getz.
1972.
Factors influencing the local distribu-
tion of the red-back vole,
ClethriorJo!!1.Y~ _g~PEeri, in New England.
Univ.
Conn. Occas. Pap. 8iol. Sci. Ser. 2(9):115-138.
13


1973.
Factors
influencing
the
local
distribution
of
the
red-back
vole,
Clethrionomys
gapperi,
in
New
England:
II.
Vegetation
cover,
soil
moisture,
and debris cover.
Univ.
Conn.
Occas.
Pap.
Biol.
Sci. Ser. 2(11):159-180.
Rickard,
W.
H.
1960.
The distribution of small
mammals in relation to the
climax
vegetation
mosaic
in
eastern
Washington
and
northern
Idaho.
Ecology 41(1):99-106.
Scott,
V. E., G. L. Crouch,
and J.
A. Whelan.
1982.
Responses of birds and
small mammals to clearcutting in
a subalpine forest
in central
Colorado.
U.S. Dept. Agric., For. Serv., Res. Note RM-422.
6 pp.
Spurr,
S. H.,
and B. V. Barnes.
1980.
Forest ecology.
John Wiley and Sons,
New York, NY.
687 pp.
Ure, D. C.
Personal communication (letters dated 19 November 1982 and 28 March
1983).
Colorado State University, Ft. Collins, Colorado.
Ure, D. C.,
and C. Maser.
1982.
Mycophagy of red-backed voles in Oregon and
Washington.
Can. J. Zool. 60(12):3307-3315.
' .
U.S.
Fish
and
Wildlife
Service.
1981.
habitat suitability index models.
Serv., Div. Ecol. Servo
n.p.
Standards
for
the
development
of
103 ESM.
U.S.
Dept. Int., Fish Wildl.
\.
-,
\
Williams,
O.
1955.
Distribution of mice
and
shrews
in
a
Colorado
montane
forest. J. Mammal. 36(2):221-231.
14


REPORT DOCUMENTATION . I._REpORT NO.
PAGE
: FWSjOBS-82jlO.42
12.
I I.
Aec:,plenr. Acc..&lon No.
•• TOtla and Subtltla
,~Habitat Suitability Index Models:
Southern Red-Backed Vole
(Western United States)
1
5. Aaport Oata
I
April 1983
4.
7. Author(sl
Arthur W. Allen
IS. Parlarm,". O..anlzallon Rept. No.
9. Parlormin. O..anization Nama and Addr..a
Habi ta t Eva1ua ti on Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2627 Redwing Road
Fort Collins, CO
80526
10. Prolaet/Tuk/Wor1C Unit No.
11. Contract(C) or GranllGl No.
eCl
(Gl
12. $gonsorin. Or.anizatlon Nama and Addr... Wes tern Energy and Land Use Team
Division of Biological Services
Research and Development
Fish and Wildlife Service
Washinaton
nr.
?O?40
13. Typa ot Ragort & Pariod Coverad
14.
15. Supplamantary Nota.
, .
IL Ab.tract (limit: 200 WOnlal
Habitat preferences of the southern
red-back~d vole
(ClethrionolT~s gapperi) are
described in this publication, which is one of a series of Habitat Suitability
Index (HSI) models.
A review and synthesis of the literature is followed by
~"development of a model of the species-habitat requirements of the southern red-
~\
backed vole.
Habitat suitability indexes are designed for use with Habitat
Evaluation Procedures previously developed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
17. Documant Anaiysl.
a. Oa.c"pto"
Mathematical models
Wil dl ife
Habitabi1i ty
b. Idantifiers/Ogan·Endad Tarms
, 21.
No. 01 Pa...
O"'ONAL FOR" 27'2 ,.1,-171
,Form."y :-InS-lSI
Ceoartm."r of Commerce
J
14
Ill. Security Clu. (Th,s Reoortl
UNCLASS IFI ED
::1).
Sec:U(lty Cl... (Th,. P,.e'
[INr.I ASSIFTFn
•
I.
C'
r!1"\\JCOa.,uC"I'UT OIJIa..Tla..r.. r-ic cv-e tQA'l.
hIll ',:'/
'~Il~' ~rr.lnN NO
8
s•• Inscructron. on
~.y.rs.
Release Unlimited
Habitat Suitability Indexes (HSI)
Southern red-backed vole
Clethrionomys gapperi
.s.. ANSI-ZJ9.UI
\~ e. COSATl Fiald/Group
18. AvaIlabIlity Slat,mant


......-. ...;
*
HeadQuarters. DivISion of BiologIcal
Services. Washington. DC
..
Eastern Energy and Land Use Team
Leelown. WV
*
National Coastal Ecosyslems Team
suceu. LA
•
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Ft Colhns. CO
•
t.ocanons 01 RegIOnal Ollices
,,,
r- - - -
-----6:,-----
L-,__
,
/ ---,
,
: ,---
,
.,
I
National Wetlands Research
Center Library
1""'111'1
•"
__ ~ 3
"r
r
--,-
'\
'1
"
REGION I
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Lloyd Five lIundred Building, Suite 1692
500 N.t. Mullnomah Street
Portland, Oregon 97232
REGION 4
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Richard B. Russell Building
75 Spring Street, S.W.
Atlanta, Georgia 30303
REGION 2
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
P.O. Box 1306
Albuquerque, New Mexico H710J
REGION 5
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
One Gateway Center
Newton Corner, Massachusetts 0215H
REGION 7
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
10II E. Tudor Road
Anchorage, Alaska l)l)50J
REGION 3
Regional Director
II.S. hsh and Wildlife Service
Federal Butldmg, FOil Snelling
Twin Cities, Minnesota 55111
REGION 6
Regional Director
U.S. fish and Wildlife Service
1).0. Box 254li6
Denver Federal Center
Denver, Colurudo H0225


. .
~.
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
u.s. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
As the Nation's principal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has respon-
sibility for most of our .nationally owned public lands and natural resources. This includes
fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources, protecting our fish and wildlife,
preserving th&environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The Department as·
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to assure that their development is in
the best interests of all our people. The Department also has a major responsibility for
American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in Island territories under
U.S. administration.
