--- 
source: hsi-019.pdf
--- 

Biological Services Program
and
Division of Ecological Services
FWS/OBS-8211 0.19
JULY 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
GRAY SQUIRREL
___ish and Wildlife Service
SK
.8. Department of the Interior
361
.U54
10.19


The Biological Services Program was established within the U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service to supply scientific information and methodologies on
key environmental issues that impact fish and wildlife resources and their
supporting ecosystems.
The mission of the program is as follows:
•
To strengthen the Fish and Wildlife Service in its role as
a primary source of information on national fish and Wild-
life resources, particularly in respect to environmental
impact assessment.
•
To gather, analyze, and present information that will aid
decisionnakers in the ide·ntification and resolution of
problems associated with major changes in land and water
use.
•
To provide better ecological information and evaluation
for Department of the Interior development programs, such
as those relating to energy development.
Information developed by the Biological Services Program is intended
for use in the planning and decisionmaking process to prevent or minimize
the impact of development on fish and wildlife.
Research activities and
technical assistance services are based on an analysis of the issues, a
determination of the decisionmakers involved and their information needs,
and an evaluation of the state of the art to identify information
~aps
and to determine priorities.
This is a strategy that wll1 ensure that
the products produced and disseminated are timely and useful.
Projects have been initiated in the following areas:
coal extraction
and conversion; power plants; geothermal, mineral and oil shale develop-
ment; water resource analysis, including stream alterations and western
water allocation; coastal ecosystems and Outer Continental Shelf develop-
ment; and systems inventory, including National Wetland Inventory,
habitat classification and analysis, and information transfer.
The Biological Services Progra.m consists of the Office of Biological
Services in Washington, p.e., which is responsible for overall planning and
management; National Teams, which provide the Program's central scientific
and technical expertise and arrange for contracting
biolo~ical services
studies with states, universities, consulting firms, and others; Regional
Staffs, who provide a 1ink to problems at the operating level; and staffs at
certain Fish and Wildlife Service research facilities, who conduct in-house
research studies.
This model is designed to be used by the Division of Ecological Services
in conjunction with the Habitat Evaluation Procedures.


FWS/OBS-82/10.19
July 1982
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX MODELS:
GRAY SQUIRREL
by
Arthur W. Allen
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Drake Creekside Building One
2625 Redwing Road
Fort Collins,
CO
80526
Western Energy and Land Use Team
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
Washington,
DC
20240


This report should be cited as:
Allen,
A.
W.
1982.
Habitat suitability
index
models:
gray
squirrel.
U.S.
Dept. Int., Fish Wildl. Servo FWS/OBS-82/10.19.
11 pp.


PREFACE
This document is part of the Habitat Suitability Index (HSI) Model Series
(FWS/OBS-82/10), which provides habitat information useful
for
impact assess-
ment
and
habitat
management.
Several
types
of
habitat
information
are
provided.
The Habitat Use Information Section is largely constrained to
those
data that can be used to derive quantitative relationships between key environ-
mental variables and habitat suitability.
The habitat use information provides
the foundation for HSI models that follow.
In addition, this same information
may be useful
in the development of other models
more appropriate to specific
assessment or evaluation needs.
The HSI Model Section documents a habitat model and information pertinent
to its application.
The model synthesizes the habitat use
information into a
framework appropriate for field application and is scaled to produce an index
value between 0.0 (unsuitable habitat) and 1.0 (optimum habitat).
The applica-
tion
information includes descriptions of the geographic ranges and seasonal
application of the model, its current verification status,
and
a listing
of
model variables with recommended measurement techniques for each variable.
In essence, the model presented herein is a hypothesis of species-habitat
relationships and not a statement
of
proven
cause
and effect
relationships.
Results of model performance tests,
when available,
are referenced.
However,
models
that
have
demonstrated reliability
in
specific
situations
may
prove
unre 1i ab1e in others.
For thi s rea son,
feedback is encouraged from users of
this model concerning improvements and other suggestions that may increase the
utility and effectiveness of this habitat-based approach to fish and wildlife
planning.
Please send suggestions to:
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
Western Energy and Land Use Team
U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service
2625 Redwing Road
Ft. Collins,
CO
80526
iii


CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE
iii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
v
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
1
Genera 1
1
Food
1
Water
2
Cover
2
Reproduct ion
3
Interspersion.....................................................
3
Special Considerations............................................
3
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL..................................
3
Model Applicability.....
3
Model Description.................................................
4
Model Relationships...............................................
6
Appl ication of the Model
8
SOURCES OF OTHER MODELS
10
REFERENCES .. ,..........................................................
10
iv


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge F. S. Barkalow and C.
M. Nixon for their review
of this habitat model.
The cover of this document was illustrated by Jennifer
Shoemaker.
Word processing was provided by Carolyn Gulzow and Dora Ibarra.


GRAY SQUIRREL (Sciurus carolinensis)
HABITAT USE INFORMATION
General
The
gray
squirrel
(Sciurus
carolinensis)inhabits
hardwood
and
mixed
hardwood-coniferous
forests
(Uhlig
1955;
Golley
1962).
Although
they
may
occur
in
a variety of forested habitat types,
large,
densely
forested
areas
are preferred (Taylor 1974).
Food
Fruits,
floral
parts,
buds,
bark,
roots,
fungi,
and
animal
matter
are
seasonally important foods
for
the
gray squirrel
(U.S.
Forest Service
1971).
The
annual
diet
of
the
gray
squirrel
in
Missouri
included
97
plant
and
47
animal
foods (Korschgen 1981).
Eighteen of the plant
items contributed 86.8%
of the total
food
volume.
Mast was the principle food item during the winter
months.
Hickories (Carya spp.),
pecan
(~. illinoensis), black walnut (Juglans
nigra),
and red mulberry (Morus rubra) were used to a much greater extent than
indicated
by
their
percentage
of
the
forest
composition.
Hickory
mast
was
selected most often by squirrels in Ohio (Nixon et al. 1968).
A
significant
relationship
existed
between
the
annual
seed
crop
and
subsequent
squirrel
densities
in
an
Ohio
study
(Nixon
et
al.
1975).
The
survival
of
summer-born
juvenile
squirrels
was
drastically
reduced when the
seed crop fell
below 145.7 kg of sound seed per
ha
(130 lb/acres),
because of
the
increased competition
for
mast
from older individuals
and other wildlife
species.
A mast production greater than 168 kg/ha (150 lb/acres) is needed to
sustain
reasonably
high
squirrel
densities.
Approximately 8.5 m2
(71.8 f t ")
of basal area in trees of seed producing size
[~ 25.4 cm (10 in)] will
produce
this amount of seed.
A variety
of
mast
produci ng
species
should
be
present over a range of
sites
in order to minimize the
effect
of
crop
failure
(Nixon
et al.
1975).
Mast crops
vary
by species,
age of tree, soil
and weather influences and seed
production
by
individual
trees (Spurr and Barnes
1980).
Weather is
unlikely
to
have
a major
impact on
seed production ina forest that conta ins
several
tree species because the time of flowering will vary by species.
Large,
dominant trees with exposed,
sunlit
crowns
are
the
primary
seed
producers
in closed stands (Spurr and Barnes 1980).
Smaller trees with shaded
crowns will produce few, if any, seeds.
1


Water
Eastern gray squirrels can satisfy water needs from free water or
succu-
lent plant materials (U.S.
Forest Service 1971).
However, pregnant and lactat-
ing
females
often
use
free
water
(Barkalow
pers.
comm.).
Therefore,
free
water should be available within the normal home range.
Cover
Optimum gray squirrel habitat in Illinois was a closed canopy forest with
a well
developed
understory
(Nixon et al.
1978).
The squirrels
were
most
often associated with extensive, ungrazed forests with a predominance of trees
in the sawtimber size class [dbh
~ 22.8 cm (9 inches)].
Important tree species
were sugar maple (Acer saccharum), white oak (Quercus alba), elm (Ulmus spp.),
and black oak (Q. YelUtina).
These species
indicate climax,
or near climax,
conditions
on upland
sites
in
Illinois.
Gray
squirrels
were
absent
from
forests
in
early
successional
stages
containing
tree
species
such
as
osage
orange
(Maclura
pomifera),
shagbark
hickory
(~.
ovata),
hackberry
(Celtis
occidental is), and hawthorn (Crataegus spp).
Tree cavities are almost always used by gray squirrels for rearing their
winter litters (Barkalow pers.
comm.).
Although leaf nests are often used by
fox squirrels,
they
are
seldom
used
by gray
squirrels
(Nixon
pers.
comm.).
The most critical
need
for
dens
is
for
rearing litters
and winter shelter
(Nixon et al. 1968).
At least one den per 0.8 ha (2 acres) was recommended as
necessary
to
provide
enough
winter
shelter
for
gray
squirrels
(Sanderson
1975).
Two to five den trees per 0.4 ha (2 to 5/acre) are optimum (Brown and
Yeager
1945;
U.S.
Forest
Service
1971).
Forest
stands
occupied
by gray
squirrels in Illinois never averaged less than 6 cavities/ha (2.4/acre) (Nixon
et al. 1978).
The average number of cavities was twice the number available
in stands that were not occupied by gray squirrels.
Even-aged stands of hardwoods less than 30 to 40 years old do not produce
sufficient mast or cavities to support gray squirrel populations (U.S. Forest
Service
1971).
Hardwood
stands
more
than
60 years
old
are
optimum
gray
squirrel habitat.
Ash
(Frax i nus
spp.),
elm,
oaks,
hi ckori es,
beech
(Fagus spp.),
cypress
(Taxodium distichum),
sycamore
(Platanus occidentalis),
sassafras
(Sassafras
albidum),
and basswood (Tilia spp.) are most often used as den trees by gray
squirrels in the eastern United States (Goodrum 1937;
Nixon 1968).
Blackgum
(Nyssa sylvatica),
beech,
and maple (Acer spp.) produced most of the cavities
suitable for gray squirrels in
Georgia~though oaks, which are more common,
may be the most important trees in terms of providing shelter (Golley 1962).
Sassafras,
elm,
beech,
and
sugar maple
in
Illinois contained more cavities
than
expected
based
on their relative abundance (Nixon et al.
1980).
White
oak and black walnut contained significantly fewer cavities than expected.
Gray squirrels in West Virginia usually nested in live trees with a dbh
of
at
least
40.0 cm
(15.7 inches)
(Sanderson
et
al.
1975).
Eighty-eight
percent of gray squirrel dens in eastern Texas were in trees with a dbh of at
least 30.5 cm (12 inches) (Baker 1944).
2


Reproduction
The
reproductive
requirements
of
the
gray
squirrel
are
assumed to
be
identical with the cover requirements described above.
Interspersion
The home range of the gray squirrel
in Missouri was from 4 to 16 ha (10
to
40 acres)
(Schwartz
and Schwartz 1959).
The mean
mi ni mum home range for
gray squirrels in Virginia was 0.49 ha (1.2 acres) (Doebel and McGinnes 1974).
Male gray squirrels generally have a larger range than do females, and their
range often overlaps with those of other adult squirrels (Bakken 1959; Cordes
and
Barkalow
1972).
Breeding
females
defend their territory against other
female gray squirrel s (Nixon et al.
1975) and are more
sedentary
than
adult
males or subadults (Nixon et al.
1980).
Therefore, they are more susceptible
to habitat changes that affect the availability of denning sites and food.
Areas occupied by gray squirrels in northern and central Illinois were at
least 20% forested (Nixon et al. 1978).
Special Considerations
The ranges of fox and gray squirrels overlap through most of the eastern
United States
(Bakken
1952 cited
by Taylor
1974).
Coexistence
of
the
two
species
occurs
mostly
in the western and northern portions of the ranges of
both species (Bakken 1952,
cited by Taylor
1974).
Although
the
two species
may inhabit the same general
area,
they tend to concentrate
in slightly dif-
ferent habitats.
Gray squirrels prefer large dense stands of hardwoods with a
dense understory, whereas fox squirrels generally prefer open woodland habitats
with little understory vegetation (Taylor 1974).
Gray squirrels in Texas were
more common
in
poorly drained
lowland areas,
while
fox
squirrels were more
frequent
in
upland
and
well
drained
bottomland
habitats
(Goodrum
1937).
Differences in habitat preference and foraging behavior are reflected in the
foods eaten.
Fox squirrels in Missouri
commonly inhabit open forests,
forest
edges,
woodlots,
and
fence
rows where oak-hickory mast (52.2% of the annual
diet) is supplemented with corn and other foods associated with these habitats
(Korschgen
1981).
Gray
squi rrel s
occupy
dense
forests
with
nearly closed
canopies and abundant ground cover,
and rely more on oak-hickory mast (73.3%
of the annual diet).
HABITAT SUITABILITY INDEX (HSI) MODEL
Mode 1 App 1icabi 1ity
Geographic area.
This
model
is
applicable
throughout
the
geographic
range of the species.
Season.
This model will produce HSI values for year-round habitat needs
of the gray squirrel.
3


Cover types.
This model is intended to evaluate gray squirrel habitat in
the following cover types (terminology follows that of U.S.
Fish and Wildlife
Service 1981):
Deciduous Forest (OF) and Deciduous Forested Wetland (DFW).
Minimum habitat area.
Minimum
habitat
area
is
defined
as
the
minimum
amount of contiguous habitat that is required before an area will
be occupied
by a species.
The mean minimum home range for the gray squirrel is at least
0.49 ha (1.2 acres).
For purposes of this model, it is assumed that a habitat
of less than 0.4 ha (1 acre) will
provide no suitability;
the HSI will equal
0.0 in such areas.
Verification level.
This
model
was
reviewed
by
F. S. Barkalow,
North
Carolina
State
University,
and
C. M. Nixon,
Illinois
Institute
of
Natural
Resources.
Improvements
suggested by these revi ewers
were
incorporated
into
this model.
Model Description
Overview.
All habitat requirements of the gray squirrel can be satisfied
wi thi n deci duous
forests
or
deci duous
forested
wetlands.
Therefore,
thi s
model
treats
the
gray squirrel
as
using only these cover types,
and habitat
evaluation based on this model
only considers the quality of life requisites
provided by deciduous forested cover types.
The cover and reproductive needs
of the gray squirrel are assumed to be identical.
It also is assumed that the
availability
of
water will
never
be more
limiting
than
the winter
food
or
cover/reproduction potential of the site.
The following sections document the logic and assumptions used to trans-
late habitat information for the gray squirrel to the variables and equations
used in the HSI model.
Specifically, these sections cover:
(1) identification
of variables used
in the model; (2) definition and justification of the suit-
ability levels of each variable; and (3) description of the assumed relation-
ships between variables.
Figure 1
illustrates
the
relationships
of
habitat
variables,
life
requisites, and cover types for the gray squirrel.
Winter food component.
A wide variety of vegetative food is consumed by
the
gray
squirrel
during
the spring and summer.
The late summer, fall,
and
winter diet consists mainly of hickory,
beech,
and oak mast.
It is
assumed
that
the availability of fall
and winter
food
will
always be more critical
than the
avail abi 1i ty of
spri ng
and
summer
food.
Mi xed forest
stands wi11
provide a more stable winter food supply than stands that consist of only one
mast producing species.
A forest stand should have at least 8.5 m2 per hectare
(36 ft 2/acre)
of
basal
area of
seed producing trees
[z 25.4 cm
(10 inches)
dbh] .
It is assumed that the optimum dens i ty of mast trees is between 40 to
60% canopy closure.
When tree canopy closure is greater than 60% mast quality
and quantity decreases because tree crowns are shaded by adjacent trees.
Winter food quality is a function of the density and species diversity of
mast
producing trees of the
proper
size
in
the
stand.
Habitats which lack
trees that produce
hard
mast
will
have no winter
food
for
gray squirrels.
4


Habitat variables
Life requisites
Cover types
Percent canopy closure of trees that
p roduce mast (e.g.,
oak,
hickory,
walnut,
pecan,
and
beech) which
are greater than 25.4 cm (10
inches)
dbh.
Diversity of trees that produce hard mast
Winter food
Deciduous forest
Deciduous forested
wetland
____ HSI
Cover/reproduction
Percent shrub crown cover-
Pecceot tcee c,oopy Clo,uce~
Average dbh of overstory trees
en
Figure 1.
Relationship of habitat variables, life requisites, and cover types in the
gray squirrel HSI model.


Species diversity
in
a forest
contributes to a stable food
supply.
Optimum
conditions are assumed to exist when the forest stand contains at least four
species of trees that produce hard mast.
Cover/reproduction component.
Dense
forest
stands
that
have overstory
trees with large diameter,
and a moderately dense understory provide optimum
cover
for
gray
squirrels.
Gray squirrels
are
almost entirely dependent
on
tree cavities for winter cover and litter rearing.
Forest stands dominated by
mature to
overmature trees are assumed to contain enough cavities to meet the
cover requirements of the gray squirrel.
Optimum conditions are believed
to
occur when tree canopy closure ranges from 40 to
75% and the average dbh of
overstory trees
is at
least
38.1 cm
(15 inches).
Overstory
trees
with
an
average dbh of 12.7 cm (5 inches) or less indicate a forest stand that is too
young to contain the cavities required by gray squirrels.
The density of shrubby understory vegetation
in a forest will
influence
the
cover/reproduction
value
for
gray
squirrels.
Optimum understory
shrub
crown cover is assumed to range from 20 to
30%.
Forest
stands that
do not
have a shrub understory will be of slightly less value than stands with optimum
shrub density.
When shrub density increases above 30%, the cover/reproduction
value of the stand will decrease, regardless of the percent closure or size of
overstory trees.
It is assumed
that,
although
understory
shrub density
may
greatly reduce the value of a stand value as gray squirrel cover/reproduction
habitat, it will
never completely limit the ability of the
stand
to
provide
cover.
Model Relationships
Suitability Index (SI) graphs for habitat variables.
This
tains
suitability
index
graphs
that
illustrate
the
habitat
described in the previous section.
section con-
relationships
Cover
type
DF,DFW
Variable
Percent canopy closure
of trees that produce
hard mast (e.g., oak,
hickory, walnut, pecan,
and beech) which are
~ 25.4 cm (10 inches)
dbh.
6
x
(1)
-g 0.8
......
~06
......
....
.0
co 0.4
+J
.....
::l(/}0.2
25
50
%
75
100


1.0
DF,DFW
V2
Diversity of tree species
that produce hard mast.
x
~ 0.8-
s:::
A)
None present
.......
B)
1 species present
~0.6-
C)
2 species present
D)
3 species present
~ 0.4 -
E)
4 or more species
+J
present
.,....
::::l
VlO.2
A
B
c
o
E
DF,DFW
Percent tree canopy
closure.
Tree Species Diversity
X
OJ
-g 0.8
>,
.~ 0.6
.,....
.0
.B 0.4
.,....
::::l
Vl 0.2
25
50
%
75
100
DF,DFW
Average dbh of overstory
trees.
1. 0 +-0-..............................-....-......................-+-0------1-
X
OJ
-g 0.8
~0.6
.,....
-e--
.0
.B 0.4
'r-
::::l
Vl 0.2
7
12.7
5
25.4
10
38.1
15
50.8
20
(cm)
(inch)


DF,DFW
Percent shrub crown
cover.
X
<LJ
-g 0.8
.......
~0.6
.....
r--
.....
..0
.;:l0.4
.....
::5
(/)0.2
25
50
%
75
100
Equations.
In
order
to
obtain
life
requisite
values
for
the
gray
squirrel, the 5I values for appropriate variables must be combined through the
use
of equations.
A discussion and explanation of the assumed relationships
between
variables
was
included
under
Model Description,
and
the
specific
equations in this model
were chosen to mimic these perceived biological rela-
tionships as closely as possible.
The suggested equations for obtaining life
requisite values for the gray squirrel are presented Figure 2.
Life Requisite
Winter food
Cover/reproduction
Cover Type
DF,DFW
DF,DFW
Equations
Figure 2.
Equations for determining life requisite values by
cover type for the gray squirrel.
H5I determination.
The H5I for the gray squirrel will
equal
the lowest
of the values obtained for Winter Food or Cover/reproduction.
Application of the Model
Definitions of variables and suggested field measurement techniques (Hays
et al. 1981) are presented in Figure 3.
8


Variable (definition)
Percent canopy closure
of trees that produce
hard mast (e.g., oak,
hickory, walnut, pecan,
and beech) which are
~ 25.4 cm (10 inches)
dbh [the percent of the
ground that is shaded by
a vertical projection of
the canopies of trees which
produce a hard shelled fruit
and have a dbh of at least
25.4 cm (10 inches)].
Diversity of tree species
that produce hard mast
(the number of tree
species present in the
stand or sample site
that produce hard mast).
Percent tree canopy
closure [the percent of
the ground surface that
is shaded by a vertical
projection of the canopies
of all woody vegetation
> 5.0 m (16.5 ft) tall].
Average dbh of overstory
trees [the average diameter
at breast height (1.4 m;
4.5 ft) above the ground
of those trees that are
~ 80 percent of the height
of the tallest tree in the
stand].
Percent shrub crown cover
[the percent of the ground
surface that is shaded by a
vertical projection of the
canopies of woody vegetation
< 5 m (16.5 ft) tall].
Cover types
DF,DFW
DF,DFW
OF ,DFW
DF,DFW
DF,DFW
Suggested technique
Calculated area of
plant using crown
diameter on strip
quadrat
Transect, tally
Transect, line inter-
cept, remote sensing
Cruise for tallest
tree, sample with
optical range finder
and Biltmore stick on
strip quadrat
Transect, line inter-
cept
Figure 3.
Definitions of variables and suggested measurement
techniques.
9


SOURCES OF OTHER MODELS
No other habitat models for the gray squirrel were located.
REFERENCES
Baker,
R. H.
1944.
An ecological
study of tree squirrels in eastern Texas.
J. Mammal. 25(1):8-24.
Bakken,
A.
1952.
Interrelationships
of
Sciurus carolinensis
(Gmelin)
and
Sciurus niger (Linneaus) in mixed populations.
Ph.D. Diss., Univ. Wise.,
Madison.
188 pp.
Cited by Taylor 1974.
1959.
Behavi or of gray
squi rre 1s .
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc.
Game and Fish Commissioners 13:393-407.
Barkalow,
F. S., Jr.
Personnal communication.
Zoology Dept., North Carolina
St. Univ., Raleigh.
Brown, L. G.,
and
L.
E. Yeager.
1945.
Fox squirrels and gray squirrels
in
Illinois.
Illinois Nat. Hist. Surv. Bull. 23(5):449-536.
Cordes, C. L., and F. S. Barkalow.
1972.
Car 0 1ina gray
squi r r e1 popu1at ion .
Fish Commissioners 26:124-135.
Home range and dispersal
in a North
Proc.
Southeastern Assoc.
Game and
Doebel, J.
H.,
and B.
S. McGinnes.
1974.
Home range and activity of a gray
squirrel population.
J. Wildl. Manage.
38(4):860-867.
Golley, F.
B.
1962.
Mammals of Georgia,
a study of their distribution and
functional role in the ecosystem.
Univ. Georgia Press, Athens.
218 pp.
Goodrum,
P.
1937.
Notes on gray and fox squirrels of eastern Texas.
Trans.
N. Am. Wildl. Conf. 2:449-504.
Hays, R. L., C. S. Summers, and W. Seitz.
1981.
Estimating wildlife habitat
variables.
U.S.D.l. Fish and Wildlife Service.
FWS/OBS-81/47.
173 pp.
Korschgen,
L. J.
1981.
Foods of fox
and gray squirrels in
Missouri.
J.
Wildl. Manage 45(1):260-266.
Nixon, C. M.
Personnal communication (letter dated 2 October 1981).
Illinois
Inst. Nat. Resour., Champaign, IL.
1968.
Squirrel
management guidelines for wildlife areas.
Ohio
Dept. Nat. Resour., Div. Wildl. Inservice Document 55.
8 pp.
Nixon,
C. M.,
S. P. Havera,
and
R. E. Greenberg.
abundance of the gray squirrel
in Illinois.
Biol. Notes 105.
55 pp.
10
1978.
Di stribution
and
Illinois Nat.
Hist.
Surv.


Nixon,
C. M.,
S.
P.
Havera,
and
L.
P.
Hansen.
1980.
Initial
response
of
squirrels to forest changes associated with selection cutting.
Wildl.
Soc. Bull. 8(4):298-306.
Nixon, C. M.,
M.
W. McClain, and R. W.
Donohoe.
1975.
Effects of hunting and
mast crops on a squirrel population.
J. Wildl. Manage. 39(1):1-25.
Nixon, C. M., D. M. Worley, and M.
W.
McClain.
1968.
Food habits of squirrels
in southeast Ohio.
J. Wildl. Manage. 32(2):294-304.
Sanderson, H. R.
1975.
Den-tree management for tree squirrels.
Wildl.
Soc.
Bull. 3(3):125-131.
Sanderson,
H. R.,
W.
M.
Healy, J.
C.
Po"lk, J.
D. Gill,
and J.
W.
Thomas.
1975.
Gray squirrel habitat and nest-tree preference.
Proc. Southeastern
Assoc. Game and Fish Commissioners 29:609-616.
Schwartz,
C. W.,
and
E.
R. Schwartz.
1959.
The wild mammals of Missouri.
Univ. Missouri Press and Missouri Dept. of Conserv., Columbia.
341 pp.
Spurr, S.
H., and B. V. Barnes.
1980.
Forest ecology.
John Wiley and Sons.
New York, New York.
687 pp.
Taylor,
G. J.
1974.
Present status and habitat survey of the Delmarva fox
squirrel
(Sciurus niger cinereus) with a discussion of reasons for its
decline.
Proc.
Southeastern
Assoc.
Game
and
Fish
Commissioners
27:278-289.
Uhlig, H. G.
1955.
The gray squirrel, its life history, ecology, and popula-
tion characteristics
in
West Virginia.
West
Virginia
Conserv.
Comm.
182 pp.
U.S.
Fish
and
Wildlife
Service.
1981.
habitat suitability index models.
Div. Ecol. Servo n.p.
Standa rd s
for
the
deve 1opment
of
103 ESM.
U.S.D.l.
Fish Wildl. Serv.,
U.S.
Forest Service.
1971.
Wildlife habitat management handbook.
U.S.D.A.
For. Serv., Southern Region.
FSH 2609.23R.
n.p.
11


5027'2
101
.
REPORT DOCUMENTATION
I 1. REPORT NO.
I 2.
I 3. Recipient's AccRslon No.
PAGE
i
FWS/OBS-82/10.19
I
I
I
•• Title and Subtitle
i 5. Report Date
Habitat Suitabi 1i ty Index Models:
Gray Squirre1
Julv 1982
6.
•
7. Author(s)
8. Performinll O,.anizatlon Rept. No.
Arthur W. Allen
9.
Performinll O,.anization Name and Address
Habitat Evaluation Procedures Group
1 10• Project/Task/Work Unit No.
Western Energy and Land Use Team
II
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
r11. Contraet(C) or Grant(Gl No.
Drake Creekside Building One
I (el
2625 Redwing Road
, (Gl
Fort. rollins
rolorado
RO!)~fi
12. Sponsorinll Organization Name and Address
Western Energy and Land Use Team
13. Type of ReQQrt & Period Covered
Office of Biological Services
Fish and Wildlife Service
U.S. Department of the Interior
I 14.
I
Washington, DC
20240
I
15. Supplementary Notes
·11i. Abstract (Limit: 200 words)
Habitat preferences and species characteristics of the gray squirrel (Sciurus carolinen-
sis) are described in this publication.
It is one of a series of Habitat Suitability
Index (HSI) models and was developed through an analysis of available scientific data
on the species-habitat requirements of the gray squirrel.
Habitat use information is
presented in a review of the literature, followed by the development of a HSI model.
The model is presented in three formats:
graphic. word. and rnathematica1.
Suitabi 1ity
,
index graphs quantify the species-habitat relationship.
These data are then synthesized
into a model which is designed to provide information for use in impact assessment and
habitat management activities.
I
17. Document Analysis
a. Descriptors
ltJi 1dl ife
Mathematical models
Anima1 behavior
Mammals
Animal ecology
Squirrels
Habitabi 1ity
O. Identlfiers/OQen-Ended Terms
Gray squirrel
Habitat management
Impact assessment
Sciurus carolinensis
Habitat suitability index models
Habitat suitability
Habitat requirements
Habitat preference
Species-habitat relationships
c.
COSATI Field/Group
18. Availability Statement
19. Security Class (This ReDortl
: 21.
No. of Palles ,
UNCLASSIFIED
:i i - v + 11 pp
Unlimited
20.
Security Class (This Pallel
22.
!'rice
UNCLASSIFIED
(See ANSI-Z39.1Bl
s•• Instructions on
Rev-r~.
u.s.
CIJVERNMEN]' PRINTING OFYICE: 1982-5l!(H3I2/4I2
OPTIONAL FORM 272 \4-77)
(Formerly NTlS-35l
Cepartment of Commerce


o
o
CD0
Headquarters· Office of Biological
Services, Washington, e.c.
National Coastal Ecosystems Team,
Slidell, La.
Western Energy and Land Use Team,
Fort Collins, Co.
Regional Offices
REGION 1
Regional Director
U.S.Fish and Wildlife Service
Uoyd FiveHundred Building, Suite 1692
500 N.E. MultnomahStreet
Portland, Oregon97232
REGION 2
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
P.O. Box 1306
Albuquerque,
ew Mexico 87103
REGION 3
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Federal Building, Fort Snelling
Twin Cities, M~ta SU 1'1
U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
REGIONAL OFFICES
REGION 4
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Richard B. Russell Building
15 SpringStreet, S.W.
Atlanta, Georgia 30303
REGION S
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
One GatewayCenter
NewtonCorner, Massachusetts 02158
REGION 6
Repmal DiJ8Ctor
u.s. fitb and Wildlife Serviet
P.O. Box25486
DenverFtd.eral Center
Denver. Colorado80225
REGION 7
Regional Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Semce
1011 E. Tudor Road
Anchorl., Alaska 99503


DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
u.s. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
".s"
. ·.Slt A W lI .n.....;
~•.J(V I( ·.:
~
,
:\
.<
• ..• • .. ~.w ."••-~.
As the Nation's principal conservation agency, the Department of the Interior has respon-
sibility for most of our ,nationally owned public lands and natural resources. This includes
fostering the wisest use of our land and water resources, protecting our fish and wildlife,
preserving th.environmental and cultural values of our national parks and historical places,
and providing for the enjoyment of life through outdoor recreation. The Department a.,
sesses our energy and mineral resources and works to assure that their development is in
the best interests of all our people. The Department also has a major responsibility for
American Indian reservation communities and for people who live in island territories under
U.S. administration.
