--- 
source: t0725e08.pdf
--- 

Cetacea - Mysticeti - Balaenopteridae 
51
Fig. 160 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: Blue whales can be confused with the other large rorquals, fin (p. 52) and sei (p. 54)
whales. Although the great size of blue whale adults may aid in identification, the best clues for differentiating
blue whales from fin or sei whales are colour pattern, head shape, and dorsal-fin shape and position.
Size: Most adults are 23 to 27 m long (with females growing larger than males), but an Antarctic blue whale
measuring over 33 m was once taken by whalers. Newborns are about 7 m long. Adults can weigh up to 160 t.
Geographical Distribution: Blue whales tend to be open-ocean animals, but come close to shore to feed,
and possibly to breed, in some areas.Blue whales can be seen from the equator to the pack ice edges in
both hemispheres, with most poleward intrusions in both hemispheres in summer. Some blue whales are
resident. others are migratory.
80º, ,
MP‘7 
, 
 cpyg<J
 
I 
I
Biology and Behaviour: Blue whales are usually seen alone or in pairs. However, scattered aggregations
of a dozen or more may develop on prime feeding grounds. Although shorter dives are most common, dives
of up to 30 min, generally interspersed with series of shorter surfacings (at 15 to 20 sec intervals), have been
recorded. Fluking-up is not uncommon, although not all blue whales are “flukers.” Remarkably, some blue
whales have been observed breaching.
Calves are born in winter on tropical or subtropical breeding grounds.
Krill form the major part of the blue whale’s diet, and on their feeding grounds, blue whales can be observed
lunging, often on their sides or upside-down, through great clouds of these invertebrates.
Exploitation:From the time faster catcher boats and explosive harpoons made them catchable, blue whales
were hunted relentlessly from the late 19th through the mid 20th centuries. As the largest whales, they were
the most sought after of the rorquals. Although most populations remain well below pre-exploitation levels,
some stocks (such as those that feed off California) have shown encouraging signs of recovery since
protection by the International Whaling Commission (IWC) in 1965. At least in the eastern North Atlantic and
the eastern North Pacific, numbers appear to be on the rise.
IUCN Status: Endangered.
click for previous page


52
Balaenoptera physalus (Linnaeus, 1758)
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Fin whale; Fr - Rorqual commun; Sp - Rorcual  común.
Distinctive Characteristics: Fin whales are
large, but very sleek and streamlined. From       lll
above, the head is more pointed than that of the
blue whale, and the dorsal fin tends to be taller,
more falcate, and set farther forward on the tail
stock than in the blue whale. The dorsal fin rises
at a shallow angle from the animal’s back.
The most distinctive feature of the fin whale, how-
ever, is its coloration. The body is black or dark
brownish grey above and on the sides, and white
below, but the head colour is asymmetrical. The
left lower jaw is mostly dark, while the right jaw is
largely white. There tend to be several light grey
V-shaped “chevrons” on the back behind the head.
Fin whales have 260 to 480 baleen plates per side;
the plates are dark, often striated with bands of
grey and fringed with horizontal lines of yellowish
white. Usually, the front one-half to one-third of the
right side plates have more light pigmentation than
those on the left. The 50 to 100 throat pleats are
long, and reach to the navel. The thin blow is 4 to
6 m tall.
Fig. 162 Balaenoptera physalus
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 163 Skull
BALAEN Bal 4 
FIW


Cetaeea - Mysticeti - Balaenopteridae 
                    53
Fig. 164 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: The other 3 medium to large balaenopterids (blue [p. 50], sei [p. 54], and Bryde’s
[p. 56] whales) are likely to be confused with fin whales. Careful attention to colour pattern, head shape,
and dorsal fin shape and position will help to distinguish them. The head of fin whales is much more pointed
than that of blue whales, and the dorsal fin is set further back and rises at a shallower angle than those of
sei or Bryde’s whales. The best clue to identification, however, is the asymmetrical coloration of the head.
Size: Length at birth is 6 to 6.5 m. Adults can reach a maximum of 27 m in the Southern Hemisphere, but
most Northern Hemisphere adults are less than 24 m long. Large animals may attain weights of up to 75 t.
Geographical Distribution: Fin whales inhabit primarily oceanic waters of both hemispheres. They are
seen near shore, most commonly where deep water approaches the coast. Fin whales can be seen in
tropical, temperate, and polar zones of all oceans.
Biology and Behaviour: Fin whales are capable of attaining high speeds, possibly to 37 km/h, making them
one of the fastest great whales. They rarely raise their flukes on a dive, but they do occasionally breach.
Fin whales tend to be slightly more social than other rorquals, gathering in pods of 2 to 7 whales, or more.
Young are born on breeding grounds in tropical and subtropical areas in mid winter.
Fin whales feed on small invertebrates, schooling fishes, and squid. They are active lunge feeders.
Exploitation: Following depletion of blue whale stocks, whalers shifted their attention to fin whales.
Populations everywhere were substantially reduced. At present the worldwide population does not seem to
appear in any immediate danger.
IUCN Status: Vulnerable.
Fig. 165


54
Balaenoptera borealis Lesson, 1828
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Sei whale; Fr - Rorqual de Rudolphi; Sp - Rorcual del norte.
Fig. 166 Balaenoptera borealis
Distinctive Characteristics: Sei whales can be
confused with fin and Bryde’s whales, both of
which also have a prominent falcate dorsal fin. All
3 have typical rorqual body shapes. In both sei
and Bryde’s whales, the dorsal fin rises at a steep
angle from the back. However, sei whales have
only a single prominent ridge on the rostrum
(Bryde’s whales tend to have 3), and a slightly
arched rostrum with a downturned tip. Unless the
head can be seen at close quarters, however,
Brvde’s and sei whales can be especially difficult
DORSAL VIEW
to distinguish.
Coloration is mostly dark grey, except for a whitish
area on the belly. The back is often mottled with
scars (possibly from lamprey bites), and the skin
surface often resembles galvanized metal.
The 32 to 60 ventral pleats are short for rorquals,
ending far ahead of the navel. The 219 to 402
baleen plates on each side are black with very fine
fringes of light smoky grey to white. Sei whales
produce a blow up to 3 m tall.
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 167 Skull
BALAEN Bal 2 
SIW


Cetacea - Mysticeti - Balaenopteridae
55
Fig. 168 Surface - blow - dive profile
Can be confused with: Sei whales are most likely to be confused with Bryde’s whales (p. 56), less likely
with fin whales (p. 52). Attention to dorsal-fin shape and position, head shape, and colour patterns will help
to distinguish among the 3. The 3 head ridges of Bryde’s whales, and larger size and asymmetrical head
coloration of fin whales will help make them distinguishable.
Size: Adults are up to 18 m in length. Large adults may weigh 30 t. At birth, sei whales are 4.5 to 4.8 m long.
Geographical Distribution: Sei whales are open ocean whales, not often seen near the coast. They occur
from the tropics to polar zones in both hemispheres, but are more restricted to mid-latitude temperate zones
than are other rorquals.
Biology and Behaviour: Groups of 2 to 5 individuals are most commonly seen. Sei whales are fast
swimmers, possibly the fastest of all cetaceans. When slow moving sei whales surface, their blowholes and
dorsal fin are often visible above the water at the same time. Feeding sei whales tend to dive and surface
in very predictable series, often remaining visible just below the surface between breaths.
Calving occurs in mid winter, in low latitude portions of the species’ range.
Sei whales skim copepods and other small prey types, rather than lunging and gulping, like other rorquals.
This may largely explain the relative fineness of the baleen fringes and the shortness of the throat pleats in
this species.
Exploitation: As the larger rorquals became scarce in recent decades, hunting pressure on sei, Bryde’s,
and minke whales increased, largely in the Antarctic. Although heavily depleted, sei whales have recovered
somewhat more successfully from hunting than other large baleen whales.
IUCN Status: Vulnerable.
Fig. 169


56
Balaenoptera edeni Anderson, 1878
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En -
   Bryde’s whale; Fr - Rorqual de Bryde; Sp - Rorcual tropical.
Distinctive Characteristics:  
   For many years,
whalers and field observers did not distinguish
between Bryde’s and sei whales in their records.
Now, however, whales of the 2 species can be, and
are being, distinguished even at sea. Bryde’s
whales usually have 3 prominent ridges on the
rostrum (other rorquals generally have only 1).
This is perhaps the best characteristic to use,
although one is best advised to consider informa-
tion on other characters as well. The Bryde’s
whale’s dorsal fin is tall and falcate and generally
rises abruptly out of the back, a feature that will
help distinguish this species (and sei whales) from
fin whales, in which the dorsal fin rises at a rela-
tively shallow angle from the back. The height of
the blow is variable. Bryde’s whales often exhale
underwater, then surface with little or no blow.
Bryde’s whales are dark grey dorsally and lighter
ventrally. The 40 to 70 throat pleats reach the
navel. The 250 to 370 pairs of grey baleen plates
have light grey fringes.      
Fig. 170 Balaenoptera edeni
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 171 Skull
BALAEN Bal 5 
BRW
click for next page
