--- 
source: t0725e14.pdf
--- 

86
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Southern bottlenose whale; Fr - Hyperoodon austral; Sp - Ballena nariz de botella del sur.
Distinctive Characteristics: This species re-
sembles the northern bottlenose whale, with a
bulbous melon (especially in adult males), tube-
like beak, throat grooves, small dorsal fin, small
blunt flippers, and flukes with no notch (or only a
shallow one).
Fig. 223 Hyperoodon planifrons
   
These animals are light brown to dull yellow. The
belly and probably much of the head are lighter.
Large animals can be covered with light splotches,
scratches, and scars. The colour pattern of young
calves is unknown.
DORSAL VIEW
There is a single pair of conical teeth at the tip of
the lower jaw, which erupts only in adult males, and
is not visible outside the closed mouth. There may
be a smaller second pair, and several sets of
vestigial teeth, as well.
Can be confused with: Arnoux’s beaked whales
(p. 80) can be distinguished from southern bot-
tlenose whales by differences in dorsal fin and
head shape, and from Cuvier’s beaked whales
(p. 82) and Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90) primar-
ily by head shape and body patterning.
Size: Maximum known sizes are 7.8 m for fe-
males and about 7.2 m for males. If females are,
in fact, larger than males, this species differs
from its northern counterpart. However, the dis-
parity is more likely a result of the small sample
size of measured animals. Length at birth ap-
pears to be around 2 m.
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 224 Skull
Hyperoodon planifrons Flower, 1882
ZIPH Hyp 1         SRW
click for previous page


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae  
87
Geographical Distribution: Southern bottlenose whales are thought to have a circumpolar distribution in
the Southern Hemisphere, south of 29ºS. Theyapparently migrate, and are found in Antarctic waters during
the summer. Like other beaked whales, these are deep-water oceanic animals. It is possible that the whales
in several sightings of bottlenose whales in the equatorial Pacific and Indian oceans were of this species
(see below).
Fig. 225
Biology and Behaviour: Pods of less than 10 are most common, but groups of up to 25 have been seen.
They are deep divers that can remain below for over an hour. There is essentially nothing known of the
reproductive biology of this species. Southern bottlenose whales are thought to take primarily squid, but
probably also eat fish and possibly squid.
Exploitation: Although never taken commercially, some southern bottlenose whales have been killed during
whaling for research purposes. Recently, several of this species have been recorded as accidental victims
of driftnet fishing in the Tasman Sea. Numbers taken annually are not known, however.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Distinctive Characteristics: There have been several sightings at widespread locations in the tropical
Pacific and Indian oceans of an unidentified whale that appears to belong to the genus Hyperoodon (possibly
the southern bottlenose whale, H. planifrons). These animals have steep bulbous foreheads and tube-like
beaks. As in most other beaked whales, the dorsal fin is located behind the midpoint of the back, but it is
larger than in other beaked whales. During these sightings, no teeth have been visible outside the closed
mouth. Colour usually appears tan, but can range from umber-brown to bluish grey, generally with light areas
on the sides and around the head. Some individuals have had scratches on the back. When seen, the
blowhole was oriented with the concavity facing anteriorly; this is the opposite of the situation in Baird’s
beaked whale, the species with which it is most easily confused in the North Pacific.
Size: Size estimates have been in the range of 4 to 9 m.
Geographical Distribution: They are only rarely seen in the eastern tropical Pacific and there are a handful
of sightings, as well as a single stranding possibly of this species, off Sri Lanka. Recently, there has been
a report of what appears to be bottlenose whales in the Gulf of Mexico, as well.
Biology and Behaviour: It is thought that these animals may be southern bottlenose whales, which are
normally widely distributed in the Southern Hemisphere, but so far no specimens have been collected to
confirm this identification. It is also possible that these animals represent a third, as yet-unidentified, species
of Hyperoodon. Herds of the unidentified whales have contained from 1 to 100 individuals, with many groups
of 10 or greater (this is much larger than for Cuvier’s beaked whale or the various Mesoplodon species).
Hyperoodon sp. (unidentified)


88
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Shepherd’s beaked whale; Fr - Tasmacete; Sp - Ballena picuda de Shepherd.
Fig. 226 Tasmacetus shepherdi
Distinctive Characteristics: Similar in body
shape to the species of Mesoplodon described
below, Shepherd’s beaked whales have a long
pointed beak, distinct from the relatively steep
forehead. There is a shallow pair of throat
creases. The flippers are small and rounded, and
the dorsal fin, set far back, is short and falcate.
Generally, the notch between the flukes (charac-
teristic of most cetaceans) is absent.
Although all the descriptions are based on partially
decomposed specimens, the colour pattern ap-
pears to be largely countershaded, dark grey
above and lighter below. There are often several
dark diagonal bands on the sides.
Unique to beaked whales, this species has a
mouthful of sharp functional teeth. There are 17
to 21 per row in the upper jaw, and 17 to 29 in the
lower. At the tip of the lower jaw is a pair of typical
beaked whale tusks, which erupt only in adult
males.
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 227 Skull
Tasmacetus shepherdi  Oliver, 1937
ZIPH Tas 1         BSW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Ziphiidae 
89
Can be confused with: Shepherd’s beaked whales can be confused with other beaked whales, especially
Mesoplodon (starting on p. 90). However, they appear to be somewhat larger than most species of
Mesoplodon, and have a more steeply rising forehead.
Size: Lengths of 6.6 m (female) and 6.1 to 7 m (males) have been reported. Length at birth is unknown, but
is presumed to be around 3 m.
Geographical Distribution: Shepherd’s beaked whales are thought to have a circumpolar distribution in
cold temperate waters of the Southern Hemisphere. There are records from New Zealand, southern and
western Australia, both coasts of South America, and islands of the South Atlantic. Like other members of
the family, these are probably exclusively oceanic, deep water animals.
20º 
0º 
20º 
40º 
60º 
80º 
100º 
120º 
400º 
160º 
180º 
160º 
140º 
120º 
100º 
80º 
60º 
40º 
20º
Fig. 228
Biology and Behaviour: Very little is known of the natural history of this species. All of the confirmed records
are at least partially decomposed strandings. There are only 2 possible sighting records.
They are known to feed on several species of fish, possibly near the bottom in deep waters.
Exploitation: No records of human exploitation exist.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known. 
click for next page
