--- 
source: t0725e03.pdf
--- 

12 
                     Marine Marnmals of the World
2. ORDER CETACEA - Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises
The 78 living species currently recognized in the Order Cetacea are divided into 2 suborders - Odontoceti
(toothed whales) and Mysticeti (baleen whales). All representatives of a third suborder, Archaeoceti (ancient
whales). are extinct. It is generally agreed that cetaceans are the most derived of all mammals (with the
possible exception of bats). Evolved from terrestrial ancestors, they have totally adapted to living in the water,
and have no need to come ashore, even for resting or reproduction.
All cetaceans share a similar general body plan: a streamlined (albeit some more-so than others) spindle-
shaped torso; flattened paddle-like foreflippers; telescoped skull; nasal openings on top (rather than on the
front) of the head; a well-developed blubber layer; internal reproductive organs; newly derived boneless
structures in the form of tail flukes and a dorsal fin or ridge (not present in some species); and the loss of
such aquatic hindrances as hind limbs (present, if at all, as vestiges), external ear flaps, and fur (although
all have hair at some time during their early development and some retain a few rostral hairs for life). Although
they may somewhat resemble fish externally, the cetaceans’ internal anatomy betrays their terrestrial
mammalian ancestry. Their flippers contain reduced counterparts of all or most of the hand and arm bones
characteristic of other mammals; pelvic rudiments (and occasionally hind limb remnants) are present. The
internal anatomy of cetaceans is surprisingly like that of more familiar land mammals, with such interesting
exceptions as the presence of a 3-chambered stomach and cartilaginous reinforcements of the airways all
the way down to the alveoli.
2.1 Key to Identification of Cetaceans of the World
1a. 
Double blowhole; no teeth present; baleen plates suspended from upper jaw (Fig. 12)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(Baleen whale) 
1b. 
Single blowhole; teeth present (though sometimes not protruding from gums); no baleen
plates 
(Fig. 
13) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  . . . .     (Toothed whale) 
12
double blowhole
*
single blowhole
cc
teeth present
LATERAL VIEW OF HEAD 
DORSAL VIEW OF HEAD 
LATERAL VIEW OF HEAD 
DORSAL VIEW OF HEAD
Fig. 12 Baleen whale 
Fig. 13 Toothed whale
2a. 
Long ventral pleats absent (though 2 to 5 short creases or furrows may be found on
throat); dorsal fin present or absent; upper jaw relatively arched viewed from the side
(Fig.14). 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . .+3
2b. 
Long ventral pleats present; dorsal fin present; upper jaw relatively flat viewed from the
side and broad viewed from the top (Fig. 15) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Rorqual) 
5
no ventral pleats
LATERAL VIEW OF HEAD 
 
LATERAL VIEW OF HEAD
Fig. 14 
Fig. 15 Rorqual
CETACEA 
+ 3
+ 2
ventral pleats
click for previous page


Cetacea 
13
3a.
3b.
Short creases or furrows on throat 2 to 5; dorsal fin or hump present; upper jaw and
mouthline flat to slightly arched; baleen plates short (Fig. 16) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 4
No creases on chin or throat; no dorsal fin or hump; upper jaw and mouthline strongly
arched viewed from the side and very narrow viewed from the top; long, narrow black
baleen plates with fine black fringes (Fig. 17) . . . . . . . (Right whale or bowhead whale) -+ 10
dorsal fin or hump
mouthline strongly
arched
no dorsal fin or hump
slightly arched        2-5 short creases
Fig. 16 
Fig. 17 Right whale or bowhead whale
4a. 
Indistinct creases on throat 2; prominent falcate dorsal fin set about two-thirds of the way
back from tip of jaw; upper jaw arched when viewed from side; 210 to 230 yellowish white
baleen plates in each side; maximum body length 7 m; Southern Hemisphere distribution
only (Fig. 18) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .Pygmy right whale (Caperea marginata) p. 48
4b. 
Short furrows on throat 2 to 5; no dorsal fin, but small dorsal hump followed by 6 to 12
crenulations present; mouthline slightly arched; 139 to 180 white to yellowish baleen
plates with coarse bristles per side; body mottled grey and usually covered with patches
of reddish to yellowish whale lice and grey to white barnacles; maximum body length
15 m; North Pacific distribution only (Fig. 19). . . . . .Gray whale (Eschrichtius robustus) p. 62
prominent falcate dorsal fin
small dorsal hump followed by
6-12 crenulations
Fig. 18 Caperea marginata 
Fig. 19 Eschrichtius robustus
5a. Ventral pleats end before navel (Fig. 20). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 6
5b. 
Ventral pleats extend to or beyond navel (Fig. 21) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + 7
navel
navel
Fig. 20 
Fig. 21
no creases
mouthline flat to


6a. 
Ventral pleats 30 to 70, longest ending before navel (often ending between flippers); 231
to 360 baleen plates with coarse bristles per side, less than 21 cm long, mostly white or
yellowish white (sometimes with dark margin along outer edge); often conspicuous white
bands on upper surface of flippers; from above, head sharply pointed; maximum body
length 
9 
m 
(Fig. 
22). 
. . . . . . . . . . . Minke   Whale  (Baluenoptera acutorostrata)  p. 58
6b. Ventral pleats 32 to 60, longest ending past flippers, but well short of navel; 219 to 402
pairs of black baleen plates with many fine whitish bristles, less than 80 cm long; flippers
all dark; from side, snout slightly downturned at tip; maximum body length 16 m (Fig. 23)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    Sei Whale (Baluenoptera borealis)  p. 54
often conspicuóus
white hands on flippers
flippers all dark
Fig. 22 Balaenoptera acutorostrata 
Fig. 23 Balaenoptera borealis
7a. 
Flippers one-fourth to one-third of body length, with knobs on leading edge; flukes with
irregular trailing edge; less than 35 broad conspicuous ventral pleats, longest extending
at least to navel; top of head covered with knobs, 1 prominent cluster  of knobs at tip of
lower jaw; 270 to 400 black to olive brown baleen plates with grey bristles per side, less
than 80 cm long; dorsal fin usually atop  a hump; maximum body length 16 m (Fig. 24)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  Humpback whale
   (Megaptera novaeungliae) p. 60
7b. 
Flippers less than one-fifth of body length, lacking knobs; flukes with smooth trailing edge;
40 to 100 fine ventral pleats; head lacking knobs; dorsal fin not atop a hump (Fig. 25) . . . . 
8
knobs on flippers
and head
Fig. 24 Megaptera novaeangliae
knobs 
lacking
Fig. 25
8a. 
Three conspicuous ridges on snout; 40 to 70 ventral pleats extending to umbilicus; 250
to 370 slate-grey baleen plates per side, with white to light grey fringes; head coloration
symmetrical; maximum body length 16 m; tropical and subtropical distribution only
(Figs 26 and 27) . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Bryde’s whale (Balaenoptera edeni)  p. 56
8b. 
Only 1 prominent ridge on snout; 55 to 100 ventral pleats (Fig. 27) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
3 ridges on snout
Fig. 26 Balaenoptera edeni
1 ridges on snout
DORSAL VIEW OF HEADS
Fig. 27
14 
Marine Mammals of the World


9a.   Head broad and almost U-shaped from above; dorsal fin very small (about 1% of body
length) and set far back  on body; 270 to 395 black baleen plates with black bristles per
side (all 3 sides of each  plate roughly equal in length); head coloration symmetrical; body
mottled grey, with white under flippers; maximum body length 33 m (Fig. 28) . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Blue whale   (Balaenoptera musculus)  p. 50
9b. 
From above, head V-shaped and pointed at tip; dorsal fin about 2.5% of body length; 260
to 480 grey baleen plates with white streaks per side (front one-third of baleen on right
side all white); head coloration asymmetrical (left side grey, much  of right side white);
back  dark, with light streaks; belly white; maximum body length 24 m (Fig. 29) . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Fin whale  (Balaenoptera physalus) p. 52
head coloration
symmetrical
dorsal fin very small
back dark
head coloration
asymmetrical
Fig. 28 Balaenoptera musculus 
Fig. 29 Balaenoptera physalus
10b.
10a.
No callosities; white chin patch  and often white band just before flukes; 250 to 350 long
(some longer than 4 m) baleen plates per side; maximum body length 20 m; Arctic
distribution 
only 
(Fig. 
30) 
. . . . . .  . . . . . . .  Bowhead whale  (Balaena mysticetus) p. 46
Callosities (roughened areas of skin to which whale lice attach) present on head; 200 to
270 long (up to 2.8 m) baleen plates per side; body black, often with white ventral
blotches; maximum body length 17 m; temperate to subarctic distribution (Fig. 31) . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Right whale) 
+ 11
no callosities
callosities on headA 
r-J----
Fig. 30 Balaena mysticetus
LATERAL VIEW OF HEAD
Fig. 31 Right whale
11a. Northern Hemisphere distribution (Fig. 32) . . Northern right whale (Eubalaena glacialis)   p. 42
11b. Southern Hemisphere distribution (Fig. 33) . . Southern right whale (Eubalaena australis) p. 44
Fig. 32 Eubalaena glacialis 
Fig. 33 Eubalaena australis
Cetacea 
15


16 
Marine Mammals of the World
12a. Upper jaw extending well past lower jaw; lower jaw very narrow (Fig. 34)
. . (Sperm whale) + 13
12b. Upper jaw not extending much or at all past lower jaw; lower and upper jaws about same
width(Fig.35). .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
upper jaw extending
well past lower jaw
13a.
13b.
Fig. 34 Sperm whale 
Fig. 35
Body black to charcoal-grey, with white lips and inside of mouth; head squarish and large,
20 to 30% of body length; short creases on throat; S-shaped blowhole at left side of front
of head; low, rounded dorsal “hump” followed by a series of crenulations along the
midline; 18 to 25 heavy, peg-like teeth in each side of lower jaw, fitting into sockets in
upper jaw; body 4 to 18m (Fig.36) . . . . . . . . . . . Sperm whale (Physeter catodon) p. 68
Head not more than 15% of body length; blowhole set back from front of head: prominent
dorsal fin; 8 to 16 long, thin, sharply pointed teeth in each side of lower jaw, fitting into
upper jaw sockets; body less than 4 m (Fig. 37) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . (Kogia sp.- 2 species generally difficult for non-experts to distinguish) + 14
prominent dorsal fin
Fig. 36 Physeter catodon 
Fig. 37 Kogia sp.
14a. Throat creases generally absent; dorsal fin short (< 5% of body length); distance from tip
of snout to blowhole greater than 10.3% of total length; 12 to 16 (rarely 10 to 11) sharp
teeth in each half of lower jaw; maximum body length 3.4 m (Fig. 38) 
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Pygmy sperm whale (Kogia breviceps) p. 70
14b. Inconspicuous throat creases: dorsal fin tall (> 5% of body length); distance from tip of
snout to blowhole less than 10.2% of total length; 8 to 11 (rarely up to 13) teeth in each
side of lower jaw, sometimes 1 to 3 in each half of upper jaw; maximum body length 2.7 m
(Fig. 39) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dwarf sperm whale (Kogia simus) p. 72
dorsal fin short 
dorsal fin tall
Fig. 38 Kogia breviceps 
Fig. 39 Kogia simus
upper jaw not extending
much or at all past lower jaw
lower jaw
very narrow
15
blowhole at
front of head
dorsal “hump” followed 
blowhole set
by crenulations 
back


Cetacea 
17
15a. Two conspkuous creases on throat, forrning a fotward-pointing V; notch between flukes
usually absent or indistinct; dorsal fin relatively short and set far back (Fig. 40) (Beaked whale) + 16
15b. No conspicuous creases on throat; prominent median notch in flukes; dorsal fin usually
tall and in middle of back (Fig. 41) . . . . . . . . . . . (Dolphin, porpoise, or monodontid) + 25
dorsal fin relatively
short and set far back lll
prominent median
2 conspicuous creases on
no conspicuous creasesl
16a.
16b.
17a.
17b.
throat
Fig. 40 Beaked whale
on throat
Fig. 41
Exposed teeth in both upper and lower jaws (may be inconspicuous or missing in some
Gray’s beaked whales)   .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17
Lower jaw only with 1 to 2 pairs of teeth (even these not erupted in many individuals)  . . . . 
18
Many teeth in both jaws (17 to 28 per tooth row); pair of tusks at tip of lower jaw that erupt
only in males; maximum body length 7 m; Southern Hemisphere distribution only (Fig. 42)
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Shepherd’s beaked whale (Tasmacetus shepherdi) p. 88
Small head; extremely long, narrow beak; white lower jaw and dark grey upper jaw; 2
small triangular teeth well behind tip of lower jaw in males; 17 to 22 pairs of vestigial teeth
in upper jaw of both sexes (Fig. 43) . . . . .   Gray’s beaked whale (Mesoplodon grayi) p. 92
many teeth in 
long and narrow beak
both jaws
1pair of tusks
in males 
2 smal triangular
Fig. 42 Tasmacetus  shepherdi
teeth in males
Fig. 43 Mesoplodon grayi
18a.
18b.
One or 2 pairs of teeth at or near tip of lower jaw, erupted only in some adults; head either
with indistinct beak, or with distinct beak and steep forehead (Fig. 44) . . . . . . . . . . . . + 19
Usually 1 pair of teeth well behind tip of lower jaw, erupted only in adult males; small
head; prominent beak with forehead rising at shallow angle; sometimes flippers fit into
depressions on the body; scratches and scars common  on body; maximum body length
6.2 m (Fig. 45) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . 
(Mesoplodon sp.) p. 90 + 24
indistinct beak
Fig. 44
forehead rising at
shallow angle
I
scratches and scars
common  on body
/
Fig. 45 Mesoplodon sp.
notch
steep forehead


18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marine Mammals of the World
19a.
19b.
20a.
20b.
Two pairs of teeth in lower jaw, 1 pair at tip exposed outside closed mouth, second smaller
pair behind first; long tube-like beak; rounded forehead rises from snout at a steep angle)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .(Berardius sp.) + 20
One pair of teeth at tip of lower jaw (exposed only in adult males); short or indistinct beak . . . + 21
Maximum body length 13 m; Northern Hemisphere distribution only (Fig. 46) . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . Baird’s beaked whale (Berardius bairdii) p. 78
Maximum body length 11 m; Southern Hemisphere distribution only (Fig. 47) . . . . .
. .   .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Arnoux’s beaked whale (Berardius arnuxii) p. 80
21a.
21b.
Fig. 46 Berardius bnirdii 
Fig. 47 Berardius arnuxii
Beak indistinct; head small relative to body size; forehead slightly concave in front of
blowhole; single pair of teeth directed forward and upward at tip of lower jaw (exposed
only in adult males); mouthline upturned at gape; head light coloured; maximum body
length 7.5 m (Fig. 48) 
. .  .  . . . . .  . . . . . . . Cuvier’s beaked whale (Ziphius cavirostris) p. 82
Tube-like beak distinct; pronounced bulge to steep forehead; tall, pointed dorsal fin;
maximum length 10 m (Fig. 49). 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(Bottlenose 
whale) 
+ 22
beak indistinct
distinct tube-like
/
beak4
Fig. 48 Ziphius cavirostris 
Fig. 49 Bottlenose whale
22a. Southern Hemisphere distribution only (Fig. 50) 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 
 . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Southern bottlenose whale (Hyperoodon planifrons) p. 86
22b. 
Northern Hemisphere distribution. .  . . .  .  .  .  .   .  .  . .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Fig. 50 Hyperoodon planifrons


Cetacea 
19
23a. Cold temperate to subpolar; north Atlantic distribution only (Fig. 51) . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Northern bottlenose whale (Hyperoodon ampullutus) p. 84
23b. Warm temperate to tropical North Pacific, Indian, and Atlantic otean distribution . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Hyperoodon sp. (unidentified) p. 87
Fig. 51 Hyperoodon ampullatus
24. The species of the genus Mesoplodon are generally poorly known. External  morphology and
pigmentation patterns have not been properly described for most of them, and it is generally not
possible for non-experts to identify whales of this genus to species. Even for experts, examination
of skulls may be required to identify all but mature males.
24a.
24b.
24c.
24d.
24e.
24f.
24g.
24h.
Moderate beak, not sharply demarcated from forehead; males with white “cap” or “beanie”
in front of blowhole; adult males with large flattened tusk in the middle of each  side of
lower jaw, protruding above upper jaw when mouth is closed; known from North Pacific
only (females and subadults require museum preparation for identification) . . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . 
Hubbs’ beaked whale (Mesoplodon carlhubbsi) p. 98
Uniformly dark beak; in adult males, tusks near middle of lower jaw barely breaking gumline;
known from the Pacific and Indian oceans only (females and subadults require museum
preparation for identification) . . Ginkgo-toothed beaked whale (Mesoplodon ginkgodens) p. 94
White markings on beak and forehead absent; lower jaw usually light in colour;  tusks of
males very large,  located on bony prominentes  near corners  of mouth, and oriented slightly
forward; lower jaw massive (particularly in adult males), with high arching contour; forehead
has concavity in front of blowhole (females and subadults require museum preparation for
identification)    . . . . . . . . . .   . . . 
Blainville’s beaked whale (Mesoplodon densirostris) p. 90
Flattened tusks of adult males’ near tip of lower jaw (females and subadults require
museum preparation for identification) . .  Hector’s beaked whale (Mesoplodon hectori) p. 96
Small (maximum length about 4 m); dorsal fin small, triangular, and rounded at tip; colour
dark grey above, fading to lighter below; small egg-shaped teeth located on prominences
near the middle of the lower jaw in adult males; known only from eastern Pacific (females
and subadults require museum preparation for identification) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . 
Pygmy beaked whale (Mesoplodon peruvianus) p. 100
External appearance unknown; 2 teeth at tip of lower jaw of males point forward and are
oval in cross-section (specimens require museum preparation for identification) . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . .   .   . . . . . . . .    Longman’s beaked whale (Mesoplodon pacificus) p. 112
Pair of small oval teeth at tip of lowerjaw of adult males; body grey with dark areas around
eyes (females and subadults require museum preparation for identification) . . . . . .
 . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
True’s beaked whale (Mesoplodon mirus) p. 106
Two small flattened teeth near front of lower jaw of males; body dark grey above, light
grey below; known only from Atlantic Ocean (females and subadults require museum
preparation for identification) . . . .  .  .   Gervais’ beaked whale (Mesoplodon europaeus) p. 104
click for next page
