--- 
source: t0725e18.pdf
--- 

118
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - lrrawaddy dolphin; Fr - Orcelle; Sp - Delfín del Irawaddy.
Fig. 270 Orcaella brevirostris
Distinctive Characteristics: The lrrawaddy dol-
phin resembles the finless porpoise, but unlike
that species, it has dorsal fin. The fin is small and
triangular, with a bluntly rounded tip, and is set just
behind midback. The large flippers have curved
leading edges and rounded tips. The head is
blunt, with no beak; the mouthline is straight, and
there may be a visible neck crease. The U-shaped
blowhole is open toward the front, the reverse of
the situation in most dolphin species.
The back and sides of lrrawaddy dolphins are grey
to bluish grey; the belly is somewhat lighter.
Tooth counts are 17 to 20 (upper) and 15 to 18
(lower) in each row. The teeth have slightly ex-
panded crowns.
DORSAL VIEW OF MANDIBLE
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 271 Skull
Orcaella brevirostris (Gray, 1866)
DELPH Orcae 1        IRD
click for previous page


Can be confused with: lrrawaddy dolphins can be confused with finless porpoises (p. 192) or dugongs
(p. 212) in the parts of their range where these species overlap. When a clear view is obtained, lrrawaddy
dolphins are distinguishable because neither of the other species has a dorsal fin.
Size: This is a relatively small dolphin: adults range from 2 to 2.75 m. Scant evidence indicates that the
length at birth is about 1 m.
Geographical Distribution: lrrawaddy dolphins inhabit coastal, brackish, and fresh waters of the tropical
and subtropical Indo-Pacific. They range from northern Australia and New Guinea to the Bay of Bengal,
including at least the Irrawaddy, Mahakam, Mekong, Ganges, and Brahmaputra rivers. The range is poorly
documented and is thought to be more extensive than shown.
Fig. 272
Biology and Behaviour: Groups of fewer than 6 individuals are most common, but sometimes up to 15
dolphins are seen together. lrrawaddy dolphins have been seen in the same area as bottlenose and
Indo-Pacific hump-backed dolphins. lrrawaddy dolphins are not particularly active, but do make low leaps
on occasion. They are not known to bowride.
The calving season is not well known. Some calves appear to have been born from June to August, but 1
captive female gave birth in December.
Fishes, cephalopods, and crustaceans are taken as food. 
They sometimes spit water while feeding,
apparently to herd fish.
Exploitation: Shark gillnets in Australia and fish traps and other types of nets throughout the range are
known to take some lrrawaddy dolphins. Some small-scale hunting by local people probably occurs in many
areas of its range.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Cetacea - Odontoceti-Delpinae 
119


120
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Killer whale; Fr - Orque; Sp - Orca.
Fig. 273 Orcinus orca
Distinctive Characteristics: Killer whales are
among the most distinctive, and therefore easily
identified, of all cetaceans. The tall erect dorsal
fin is nearly as distinctive as the colour pattern. It
may reach 0.9 m in females and 1.8 m in males.
Adult males tend to have dorsal fins that are trian-
gular or that may even cant forward to varying
degrees. Killer whales have blunt snouts, with
only very short and poorly defined beaks. The
flippers are large and oval, and grow to lengths of
up to 2 m in bulls.
The black-and-white colour pattern is unmistak-
able. The lower jaw, undersides of the flukes, and
ventral surface from the tip of the lower jaw to the
urogenital area is white. White lobes extend up
the sides behind the dorsal fin, and there is a white
oval patch above and behind each eye. The rest
of the body is black, except for a light-grey “saddle
patch” behind the dorsal fin. In some populations,
the dorsal coloration  includes a narrow black
cape, below which the dark areas are more nearly
charcoal grey.
There are 10 to 12 large, recurved teeth in each
half of both jaws, which are oval in crosssection.
In older animals, they are often worn and damaged
by abscesses.
Can be confused with: Killer whales are easily
recognizable to almost anyone who has spent time
on the water or along the coast in areas they
frequent. The great size of the dorsal fin (espe-
cially of adult males) and unique black and white
colour pattern are diagnostic. 
At a distance,
groups without adult males can be confused with
Risso’s dolphins (p. 152) and false killer whales
(p. 126).
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
LATERAL VIEW
Fig. 274 Skull
Orcinus orca (Linnaeus, 1758)
DELPH Orc 1        KIW


Cetacea - Odontoceti-Delpinae
121
FEMALE 
MALE
Fig. 275 Surface - blow - dive profile
Size: Newborn killer whales are 2.1 ro 2.4 m in length and about 180 kg in weight. Adult females are up to
8.5 m and 7 500 kg; adult males up to 9.8 m and nearly 10 000 kg.
Geographical Distribution: This is probably the most cosmopolitan of all cetaceans. They can be seen in
literally any marine region, and killer whales have even been known to ascend rivers. Killer whales are found
in all oceans and seas, from the ice edges to the equator, in both hemispheres; however, they appear to be
more common in nearshore, cold temperate to subpolar waters.
Biology and Behaviour: Studies in the eastern North Pacific, from Washington State to Alaska, have
distinguished 2 types of killer whales, referred to as residents and transients. Although differentiated by
ecological differences, there are also differences in coloration and external morphology. In Washington and
British Columbia, at least, residents are primarily fish eaters and transients eat mostly marine mammals.
Some studies in other parts of the world suggest that this pattern may be universal.Pods of resident killer
whales in British Columbia and Washington represent one of the most stable societies known among
non-human mammals; individuals stay in their natal pod throughout life. Differences in dialects among
sympatric groups appear to help maintain pod discreteness. Most pods contain 1 up to 55 whales and
resident pods tend to be larger than those of transients.
In the Pacific Northwest, calving occurs in non-summer months, from October to March. Similarly, in the
northeast Atlantic, it occurs from late autumn to mid-winter.
Though best known for their habits of preying on warm-blooded animals (killer whales are known to have attacked
marine mammals of all groups, from sea otters to blue whales, except river dolphins and manatees), killer whales
often eat various species of fish and cephalopods.Killer whales also occasionally eat seabirds and marine turtles.
Exploitation:Pelagic whaling activities have rarely directed their attention towards killer whales, but whaling
fleets have taken a few in most years. Very small numbers of killer whales were taken in the North Pacific
by now-defunct shore whaling stations. Fishermen in many areas see killer whales as competitors, and
shooting of whales is known to occur. This problem is especially serious in Alaska, where conflicts with
longline fisheries occur. Small numbers are taken incidentally in fisheries in many areas. Live captures for
public display have been banned in most areas of the eastern North Pacific. Subsequently, live capture
activities shifted to Iceland, but in 1991, the Icelandic government announced that once current permits for
live capture expire, no new ones will be issued.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known.
Fig. 276


122
Marine Mammals of the World
FAO Names: En - Long-finned pilot whale; Fr - Globicéphale commun; Sp - Calderón común
Other scientific names still in use: Globicephala melaena (Traill, 1809).
Fig. 277 Globicephala melas
Distinctive Characteristics: 
Externally, the
long-finned pilot whale resembles its short-finned
relative. The head is globose, with an upsloping
mouthline. The flippers are extremely long (18 to
27% of the body length) and slender, with pointed
tips and an angled leading edge that forms an
“elbow.” The dorsal fin is about one-third of the
way back from the snout tip, and is low, wide-
based, and falcate. The tail stock is deepened
(remains of more-or-less uniform he00ight from the
saddle patch to just ahead of the flukes). Males
have a larger, more bulbous head; larger, thicker
dorsal fin; and deeper tail stock than do females.
Predominantly dark brownish grey to black, pilot
whales have a white to light grey anchor-shaped
patch on the chest, a light grey “saddle” behind the
dorsal fin, and light grey “eyebrow” streaks.
Inside the mouth are 8 to 13 pairs of sharp, pointed
teeth in the anterior part of each jaw.
DORSAL VIEW
VENTRAL VIEW
VIEW 
Fig. 278 Skull
Globicephala melas (Traill, 1809)
DELPH Glob 1        PIW


Cetacea - Odontoceti - Delphinidae 
123
Can be confused with: In some temperate waters, long-finned and short-finned (p. 124) pilot whales overlap
in distribution. In these areas, the 2 species will be extremely difficult to distinguish at sea. Tooth counts
and relative flipper lengths (both of which are generally not useful in at sea sightings) are helpful means of
separating the 2. In the lower latitude areas of its range, the long-finned pilot whale can be confused with
false killer (p. 126) and less likely, pygmy killer (p. 128) and melon-headed (p. 130) whales; however, the
differences in head shape and dorsal-fin shape and position should permit correct identification.
Size: Newborns are 1.7 to 1.8 m long. Adults reach 6.7 m (males) and 5.7 m (females) in length. Bulls
reach weights of 2 000 kg.
Geographical Distribution: Long-finned pilot whales occur in temperate and subpolar zones. They are
found in oceanic waters and some coastal waters of the North Atlantic Ocean. They were previously found
in the western North Pacific, but appear to be absent there today. The circum-antarctic population(s) in the
Southern Hemisphere are isolated from those of the Northern Hemisphere.
Fig. 279
Biology and Behaviour: Pilot whales are highly social; they are generally found in pods of about 20 to 100,
but some groups contain more, to over 1 000. Based on photo-identification and genetic work, pilot whales
appear to live in relatively stable pods like those of killer whales, and not in fluid groups characteristic of
many smaller dolphins.
The mating system is hypothesized to be polygynous, which is consistent with the observed sexual
dimorphism and adult sex ratio. Pilot whales are apparently deep divers. Groups often forage in broad
ranks, sometimes with other species. Although they sometimes are aerially active, pilot whales are often
seen rafting in groups at the surface, apparently resting.
This is one of the species most often involved in mass strandings. Strandings are fairly frequent, for instance,
on Cape Cod (Massachusetts, USA) beaches from October to January. Their tight social structure also
makes pilot whales vulnerable to herding, and this has been taken advantage of by whalers in drive fisheries
off Newfoundland, the Faeroe Islands, and elsewhere.
Breeding can apparently occur at any time of the year, but peaks occur in summer in both hemispheres.
Mating occurs primarily in spring to summer.
Primarily squid eaters, pilot whales will also take small medium-sized fish, when available.
Exploitation: The major exploitation of this species is probably the drive fisheries that were mentioned
above. Today they are only taken in Greenland and the Faeroe Islands, but in the past, Newfoundland,
Norway, Iceland, Shetland, Orkney, and the Hebrides were also sites of fisheries. Pilot whales are also
known to be taken incidentally in trawl and gillnet fisheries in the western North Atlantic, and in swordfish
driftnets in the Mediterranean.
IUCN Status: Insufficiently known. 
click for next page
