--- 
source: TEMP--415E2C0A-199D-4F9A-B42F-BD9F39E563B3.pdf
--- 

COMMENT
The Kardashian index: a measure of discrepant
social media profile for scientists
Neil Hall
Abstract
In the era of social media there are now many different
ways that a scientist can build their public profile; the
publication of high-quality scientific papers being just
one. While social media is a valuable tool for outreach
and the sharing of ideas, there is a danger that this form
of communication is gaining too high a value and that
we are losing sight of key metrics of scientific value, such
as citation indices. To help quantify this, I propose the
‘Kardashian Index’, a measure of discrepancy between a
scientist’s social media profile and publication record
based on the direct comparison of numbers of citations
and Twitter followers.
Introduction
There are many scientists who, with hindsight, did not get
much recognition for their achievements while they were
alive. Consider Mary Anning, a fossil collector and
paleontologist who lived in the early 19th century. Her
meticulous recording and prolific findings contributed to
the fundamental changes in our understanding of natural
history, including the accepted view of extinction events.
Yet, because of her sex and religious beliefs, much of her
work was never recognized by her peers, and I expect you
have never heard of her. Or Ada Lovelace, the daughter of
Lord Byron, who is credited with writing the first ever
computer program for the Analytical Engine, a mechanical
computer designed by Charles Babbage. Despite her
contribution, and obvious genius, she is much less well
known than her male contemporaries. For a long time, the
same could be said of Rosalind Franklin, whose work on
determining the structure of DNA was largely ignored
until years after her death.
It may be no coincidence that all of these overlooked
heroes were women. I will return to this later.
Correspondence: neil.hall@liverpool.ac.uk
Centre for Genomic Research, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK
Now consider Kim Kardashian; she comes from a
privileged background and, despite having not achieved
anything consequential in science, politics or the arts
(although apparently she does have a scientific mind [1]),
she is one of the most followed people on twitter and
among the most searched-for person on Google. Her
notoriety is said to have stemmed from an inadvertent
internet release of a video featuring her and a boyfriend in
a private moment. While her Wikipedia entry describes her
as a successful businesswoman [2], this is due most likely to
her fame generating considerable income through brand
endorsements. So you could say that her celebrity buys
success, which buys greater celebrity. Her fame has meant
that comments by Kardashian on issues such as Syria have
been widely reported in the press [3]. Sadly, her interjection
on the crisis has not yet led to a let-up in the violence.
I am concerned that phenomena similar to that of Kim
Kardashian may also exist in the scientific community. I
think it is possible that there are individuals who are
famous for being famous (or, to put it in science jargon,
renowned for being renowned). We are all aware that
certain people are seemingly invited as keynote speakers,
not because of their contributions to the published
literature but because of who they are. In the age of social
media there are people who have high-profile scientific
blogs or twitter feeds but have not actually published many
peer-reviewed papers of significance; in essence, scientists
who are seen as leaders in their field simply because of their
notoriety. I was recently involved in a discussion where it
was suggested that someone should be invited to speak at a
meeting ‘because they will tweet about it and more people
will come’. If that is not the research community equivalent
of buying a Kardashian endorsement I don’t know what is.
I don’t blame Kim Kardashian or her science equivalents
for exploiting their fame, who wouldn’t? However, I think
it’s time that we develop a metric that will clearly indicate if
a scientist has an overblown public profile so that we can
adjust our expectations of them accordingly. In order to
quantify the problem and to devise a solution, I have
compared the numbers of followers that research scientists
© 2014 Hall; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. The licensee has exclusive rights to distribute this article, in any medium, for 12
months following its publication. After this time, the article is available under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://
creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.
Hall Genome Biology 2014, 15:424
http://genomebiology.com/2014/15/1/424


have on twitter with the number of citations they have for
their peer-reviewed work. This analysis has identified clear
outliers, or Kardashians, within the scientific community. I
propose a new metric, which I call the ‘Kardashian Index’,
which allows a simple quantification of the over, or under,
performance of a scientist on social media.
Methods
In this preliminary proof-of-concept study, I selected
research scientists and recorded their number of followers.
I did not devise a clever way of doing this randomly (after
all this is just a bit of fun) but tried to pick a randomish
selection of 40 scientists. I used Web of Knowledge to get
citation metrics on these individuals. Obviously, there are
caveats, as I may not have found them all if they have a
common name or they have changed address, but I did my
best. I tried to pick only individuals who have been on
Twitter for some time and I deliberately overlooked people
who were on BIG genome papers such as the first human
genomes as this over-inflated the citation scores. I also
captured whether the scientists were men or women. I had
intended to collect more data but it took a long time and I
therefore decided 40 would be enough to make a point.
Please don’t take this as representative of my normal
research rigor.
I took the number of Twitter followers as a measure of
‘celebrity’ while the number of citations was taken as a
measure of ‘scientific value’ (we can argue about that
another time). The data gathered are shown in Figure 1.
Results
While aware that the analysis is flawed and lacks statistical
rigor, it is a relief to see that there is some kind of positive
trend in scientific value when compared with celebrity. The
trend can be described by Equation 1:
F
¼ 43:3C0:32
Where F is the number of twitter followers and C is the
number of citations.
As a typical number of followers can now be calculated
using this formula, I propose that the Kardashian Index
(K-index) can be calculated as follows in Equation 2:
K−index ¼
F a
ð Þ
F cð Þ
Where F(a) is the actual number of twitter followers of
researcher X and F(c) is the number researcher X should
have given their citations. Hence a high K-index is a
warning to the community that researcher X may have
built their public profile on shaky foundations, while a very
low K-index suggests that a scientist is being undervalued.
Here, I propose that those people whose K-index is greater
than 5 can be considered ‘Science Kardashians’; these
individuals are highlighted in Figure 1.
Discussion
In an age dominated by the cult of celebrity we, as scientists,
need to protect ourselves from mindlessly lauding shallow
popularity and take an informed and critical view of the
10
100
1,000
10,000
100,000
5
50
500
5,000
50,000
No. of followers
No. of citations
Total citations plotted against number of Twitter followers for a sample of researcher-twitterers 
Kardashians
Figure 1 Twitter followers versus number of scientific citations for a sort-of-random sample of researcher tweeters. Red crosses
represent female tweeters and blue crosses represent male tweeters. The black trendline describes the best fit to the data. Those individuals with
a highly overinflated number of followers (when compared with the number predicted by the trendline) are highlighted by the area
labeled Kardashians.
Hall Genome Biology 2014, 15:424
Page 2 of 3
http://genomebiology.com/2014/15/1/424


value we place on the opinion of our peers. Social media
makes it very easy for people to build a seemingly impressive
persona by essentially ‘shouting louder’ than others. Having
an opinion on something does not make one an expert. But
on Twitter, for example, the ‘top tweet’ on any given subject
will not necessarily come from an expert, it will come from
the most followed person. If Kim Kardashian commented
on the value of the ENCODE project, her tweet would get
more retweets and favorites than the rest of the scientific
community combined. Experts on the Syrian conflict will
tell you how frustrating that can be.
I propose that all scientists calculate their own K-index
on an annual basis and include it in their Twitter profile.
Not only does this help others decide how much weight
they should give to someone’s 140 character wisdom, it can
also be an incentive - if your K-index gets above 5, then it’s
time to get off Twitter and write those papers.
Finally on a serious note
My introduction highlights the fact that women have a
history of being ignored by the scientific community. Inter-
estingly, in my analysis, very few women (only one in fact)
had a highly inflated Twitter following, while most (11/14)
had fewer followers than would be expected. Hence, most
Kardashians are men! This ‘study’ does not prove that we,
as a community, are continuing to ignore women, or if
women are less likely to engage in self-promotion, but it is
consistent with either or both of these scenarios.
If you would like to discuss this further please follow me
on Twitter: @neilhall_uk. At the time of writing, my
K-index in only marginally above 1. A few tweets linking
me with the word ‘Kardashian’ should put my K-index
through the roof.
Abbreviation
K-index: Kardashian index.
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no competing interests.
References
1.
The Guardian: The scientific mind of Kim Kardashian. http://www.theguardian.
com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2011/dec/15/scientific-mind-kim-kardashian.
2.
Wikipedia: Kim Kardashian. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kim_Kardashian.
3.
BBC News Magazine: #BBCtrending: why Kim Kardashian is tweeting about
Syria #SaveKasseb. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-26855276.
doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0424-0
Cite this article as: Hall: The Kardashian index: a measure of discrepant
social media profile for scientists. Genome Biology 2014 15:424.
Hall Genome Biology 2014, 15:424
Page 3 of 3
http://genomebiology.com/2014/15/1/424
