--- 
source: z02-219.pdf
--- 

Can. J. Zool. 81: 52–56 (2003)
doi: 10.1139/Z02-219
© 2003 NRC Canada
52
Sex determination in the sea otter (Enhydra lutris)
from tissue and dental pulp using PCR
amplification
Kaoru Hattori, Alexander M. Burdin, Manabu Onuma, Masatsugu Suzuki, and
Noriyuki Ohtaishi
Abstract: Historical specimens of sea otters (Enhydra lutris) provide valuable information about the pre-bottleneck
population. However, the sex of these specimens is often not known. We attempted to determine the sex of sea otters
by means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the amelogenin and the zinc finger (ZFX/ZFY) regions.
The PCR fragments of amelogenin amplified were same size regardless of the sex. On the other hand, we were able to
distinguish the sex accurately by means of the sea otter-specific restriction enzyme (NlaIII) to digest a polymorphic site
in the ZFX/ZFY region. This method was applicable to dental pulp from skull specimens with the use of novel inner
primers (KH1/KH2). We suggest that with some modification, the ZFX/ZFY system can be applied to other species
and to a variety of archaeological specimens.
Résumé : L’examen de spécimens de musée de la loutre de mer (Enhydra lutris) permet d’obtenir des renseignements
précieux sur la population antérieure au goulot d’étranglement. Cependant, le sexe de ces animaux n’est pas toujours
connu. Nous avons tenté de déterminer le sexe des loutres par amplification de l’amélogénine et de la région du doigt
de zinc (ZFX/ZFY) par la réaction de polymérisation en chaîne (PCR). Les fragments d’amélogénine amplifiés étaient
de la même taille chez les mâles et les femelles. Par ailleurs, nous avons pu reconnaître le sexe des loutres au moyen
de l’enzyme de restriction (NlaIII) spécifique à la loutre qui digère les locus du polymorphisme dans la région du doigt
de zinc (ZFX/ZFY). Cette méthode peut s’utiliser sur la pulpe dentaire obtenue sur des crânes au moyen de nouvelles
amorces internes (KH1/KH2). Nous croyons qu’avec quelques modifications, le système ZFX/ZFY pourrait être utilisé
chez d’autres espèces avec divers spécimens archéologiques.
[Traduit par la Rédaction]
56
Hattori et al.
Introduction
The sea otter (Enhydra lutris) was exploited by commer-
cial harvesting in the North Pacific Ocean during the 18th
and 19th centuries (Kenyon 1969). The current population
reflects severe bottlenecks and subsequent recovery, but mu-
seum specimens can provide information about the “natural”
population (Scribner et al. 1997).
Such specimens can provide valuable information about
not only the historical but also the current wild population.
For example, sex ratio is one such type of information. How-
ever, when the sex of specimens is unknown or uncertain, it
needs to be determined morphologically or molecularly.
Sex has been determined using skull morphology in the
sea otter (Roest 1985; Ryazanov and Maminov 1996) and
other species (Bergerud 1964; Gordon and Morejohn 1975).
However, variations among individuals or small sample sizes
have caused difficulties in establishing morphological stan-
dards for sex determination.
Molecular techniques of sex determination for many species
(Aasen and Medrano 1990; Palsbøll et al. 1992; Takahashi et
al. 1998) are based on detecting a sex-specific DNA se-
quence such as SRY, amelogenin, or ZFX/ZFY using the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Murata et al. (1996) deter-
mined the sex of sea otters using the SRY region, which is
located only on the Y chromosome. When amplified, male
samples yield a product, whereas female samples do not.
This system requires two primer sets, one for the SRY re-
gion and another as an internal positive control. On the other
hand, the amelogenin and the zinc finger (ZFX/ZFY) regions
require only one primer set to amplify a region of the X–Y
homologous gene; amelogenin was assayed for humans
(Sullivan et al. 1993) and cattle (Ennis and Gallagher 1994)
and ZFX/ZFY for humans, cattle, sheep, and goats (Aasen
and Medrano 1990). The X/Y amelogenin polymorphism pro-
vides male and female amplification fragments that differ in
length. In the ZFX/ZFY system, sex is determined by the ap-
pearance of sex-specific bands in restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) assays after PCR.
Here we determine the sex of sea otters using one primer
Received 5 April 2002. Accepted 19 November 2002.
Published on the NRC Research Press Web site at
http://cjz.nrc.ca on 7 February 2003.
K. Hattori,1 M. Onuma, M. Suzuki, and N. Ohtaishi.
Laboratory of Wildlife Biology, Graduate School of
Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo,
060-0818, Japan.
A.M. Burdin. Alaska SeaLife Center, 301 Railway Avenue,
P.O. Box 1329, Seward, AK 99664, U.S.A., and Kamchatka
Institute of Ecology and Nature Management, Russian
Academy of Sciences, Prospect Rybakov, 19A,
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, 683024, Russia.
1Corresponding author (e-mail: shuu@vetmed.hokudai.ac.jp).


set for the ZFX/ZFY region and apply the method to dental
pulp from the skulls of museum specimens.
Materials and methods
Samples
Muscle tissues from 10 sea otter carcasses (5 male; 5 fe-
male) found on Lopatka Cape in Russia were stored in 70%
ethanol. Dental pulp was collected from the canines of 318
sea otter skulls (3 male; 315 unknown sex) that are stored in
a Russian museum (Table 1).
DNA extraction
DNA was extracted using phenol – proteinase K – sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Masuda and Yoshida 1994). Muscle
tissues were sectioned (approximately 2 × 2 × 2 mm), washed
with sodium – Tris – EDTA (STE) buffer (0.1 M NaCl,
10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA), and homogenized. Den-
tal pulp was incubated at 37°C for several hours in 500 µL
of STE buffer containing a final concentration of 0.5% SDS
and 5 µg/mL of proteinase K (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and
homogenized. Homogenates were incubated at 37°C overnight,
then extracted with phenol–chloroform.
DNA amplification and analysis
Amelogenin
Two amelogenin regions were amplified by PCR. The se-
quence of oligonucleotide primers and the reaction condi-
tions are listed in Table 2. PCR reactions proceeded in a
total volume of 20 µL containing about 0.1 µg of DNA,
15.3 µL of dH2O, 0.5 U of Taq polymerase (Qiagen), 2 µL
of 10× reaction buffer, 0.4 µL of 10 mM dNTP, 0.4 µL of
10× bovine serum albumin (1 mg/mL), and 0.4 µL of each
primer (25 pmol/µL).
PCR products were resolved by electrophoresis on a 4%
agarose gel, stained by ethidium bromide, and visualized un-
der an UV illuminator.
ZFX/ZFY
DNA amplification proceeded in a manner similar to that
of amelogenin using the primers P1-5EZ/P2-3EZ (Table 2).
PCR products of male and female DNA were directly sequenced
using BigDye™and the sequencer model ABI Prism 377
(Applied Biosystems). The positions of polymorphisms in
the ZFX/ZFY region were determined using the comparative
sequencing method of Schwerin and Pitra (1994). Thereaf-
ter, the appropriate restriction enzyme, NlaIII (New England
BioLabs Inc.), was selected to digest the polymorphism loci.
PCR products were digested with this enzyme, then the re-
striction fragments were separated by 4% agarose gel
electrophoresis and visualized as described for amelogenin.
Results
Amelogenin
One primer set (Amel-A/B) amplified one band (about
100 base pairs (bp)) from both male and female DNA sam-
ples (n = 5, each; Fig. 1a). On the other hand, another
primer set (SE47/48) amplified two bands (about 200 and
300 bp; Fig. 1b). No sex polymorphisms in length were evi-
dent in either amelogenin region in the sea otter.
ZFX/ZFY
A 447-bp fragment was amplified from both male and female
DNA (Fig. 2). To select the appropriate restriction enzyme,
which digests the positions of polymorphism, the amplified
ZFX/ZFY region was sequenced on male and female sea ot-
ters (n = 5, each). Figure 3 shows the sequences of amplified
fragments of the sea otter ZFX/ZFY region. Digestion with
NlaIII yielded four fragments (203 and 82/78/73 bp) from
female otters and five (276, 203, and 82/78/73 bp) from
males (the Y chromosome did not have a NlaIII site com-
pared with the X chromosome; Fig. 3). This enzyme deter-
mined the correct sex from muscle tissues and dental pulp
from confirmed males and females (n = 13).
However, the primer set (P1-5EZ/P2-3EZ) could not amplify
a 447-bp fragment from most dental-pulp samples (82.5%;
Table 3). To amplify the shorter ZFX/ZFY region, we de-
signed new inner primers (KH1/KH2; Table 1) based on the
sequence (Fig. 3) for nested PCR of dental-pulp DNA. A
165-bp fragment was amplified from longer ZFX/ZFY-negative
samples (126 samples, 48.5%; Table 3, Fig. 4a). This shorter
ZFX fragment was digested by NlaIII once at the 60th locus
(Fig. 3), whereas the shorter ZFY fragment was not di-
gested, generating two fragments from the females (105 and
60 bp) and three from the males (165, 105, and 60 bp; a
band at 60 bp was not shown in Fig. 4b). In total, we deter-
mined the sex of 181 (57.5%) sea otters from 315 den-
tal-pulp samples of unknown sex. We could not determine
the sex of 134 samples (Table 3).
Discussion
We developed a means of accurately determining the sex
from sea otter muscle and dental pulp based on the ZFX/ZFY
polymorphism. This method was more practical than the
SRY system (Murata et al. 1996), as only one primer set is
required because an internal positive control is not needed.
Aasen and Medrano (1990) and Palsbøll et al. (1992) sug-
gested that distinguishing ZFX/ZFY by RFLP assay of some
species could be difficult because these sequences have a
high degree of similarity. However, Schwerin and Pitra (1994)
developed a quick and efficient method for sexing the spot-
ted hyena (Crocuta crocuta), which has a low rate (2.7%) of
polymorphisms between ZFX and ZFY. They confirmed the
sequence by comparative sequencing of the PCR fragments
and conducted a sensitive PCR/RFLP assay.
Similarly, we sequenced sea otter ZFX/ZFY fragments
with high homology rates (98.7%) between ZFX and ZFY,
© 2003 NRC Canada
Hattori et al.
53
Known sex
Male
Female
Unknown sex
Total
Muscle
5
5
10
Dental pulp
3
315
318
Total
8
5
315
328
Table 1. Numbers of muscle and dental-pulp samples from
the sea otter (Enhydra lutris).


and selected a restriction enzyme that recognized single base
pair polymorphisms. Sequencing can reveal species-specific
restriction enzymes and this can be applied to a wide range
of species.
We then attempted to determine the sex from unknown
samples of dental pulp. DNA extracted from dental pulp is
useful for forensic science, because teeth can be preserved
very well and the pulp cavity is protected from contamina-
tion by hard tissues (Yamada et al. 1989). Although not all
amplifications from samples of dental pulp were successful,
new inner primers (KH1/KH2) for nested PCR amplified a
shorter ZFX/ZFY fragment with polymorphisms in sequence,
even from 126 samples in which ZFX/ZFY was not detected
with the P1-5EZ/P2-3EZ primers. This result indicates an
advance in nested PCR using a novel inner primer set for
amplifying fragments from dental pulp.
However, even with the new inner primers, we could not
determine the sex of 134 samples. This could have been due
to DNA degradation or contamination with PCR amplification
inhibitors. To overcome degradation, Shindo and Yoshioka
(1998) suggested that DNA fragments from archaeological
samples of less than 50 bp are suitable for amplification.
Practically, shorter fragments (amelogenin-1, about 100 bp)
were amplified from 37 of 134 shorter ZFX/ZFY-negative
samples; degradation of DNA in our samples was suggested.
However, very short amplified products may not be suitable
for RFLP assay, as they do not separate clearly in agarose
gel (Murakami et al. 2001). We suggest that with some mod-
ifications in DNA extraction (e.g., silica-based techniques or
the use of proteinase K at 55–60°C) and purification, this
method of determining sex can be applied to various sam-
ples such as decayed carcasses, beachcast bone, or dried skin
from museum specimens, and even archaeological samples.
Sea otter bones and hairs have been excavated from archaeo-
logical sites of the Okhotsk Culture (Baba 1936; Kitagamae
1980). The sex of these remains can now be determined,
which helps our understanding of the historical population.
In addition, the status of the current sea otter population can
be monitored by determining the sex of beachcast carcasses.
Applying the amelogenin system to humans (Sullivan et al.
1993), cattle (Ennis and Gallagher 1994), horses (Fukushima
© 2003 NRC Canada
54
Can. J. Zool. Vol. 81, 2003
Locus
Primer
Sequence
Annealing temp.
(°C)
Amelogenin-1a
Amel-A
5′-CCC TGG GCT CTG TAA AGA ATA GTG-3′
60
Amel-B
5′-ATC AGA GCT TAA ACT GGG AAG CTG-3′
Amelogenin-2b
SE 47
5′-CAG CCA AAC CTC CCT CTG C-3′
58
SE 48
5′-CCC GCT TGG TCT TGT CTG TTG C-3′
Longer ZFX/ZFY regionc
P1-5EZ
5′-ATA ATC ACA TGG AGA GCC ACA AGC T-3′
45
P2-3EZ
5′-GCA CTT CTT TGG TAT CTG AGA AAG T-3′
Shorter ZFX/ZFY region
KH1
5′-TGA CCA GCA AGG CAG AGA A-3′
45
KH2
5′-TCA ACA ACC CTT GTT CAG CT-3’
Note: For all amplifications, conditions were as follows: 94°C for 3 min, followed by 35 cycles of 94°C denaturation
(1 min), annealing (1 min), a 72°C extension (2 min), and a final 72°C extension (7 min).
aFrom Sullivan et al. (1993).
bFrom Ennis and Gallagher (1994).
cFrom Aasen and Medrano (1990).
Table 2. Sequence of oligonucleotide primers and annealing temperatures for PCR.
Fig. 1. Amplification products of the amelogenin region in the
sea otter (Enhydra lutris). (a) Amplification of the amelogenin-1
fragment by the primer set Amel-A/B. (b) Amplification of the
amelogenin-2 fragment by the primer set SE47/48. Lane 1,
100-bp molecular ruler (a and b). Female (F) and male (M) frag-
ments do not differ in length.
Fig. 2. Amplification products and NlaIII restriction-fragment
profiles. Lane 1, 100-bp molecular ruler; lanes 2 and 3, ampli-
fied products from female and male otters before digestion; lanes
4 and 5, fragments digested with NlaIII. The 276-bp fragment is
present in male samples but not female samples.


© 2003 NRC Canada
Hattori et al.
55
et al. 1999), and bears (Yamamoto et al. 2002) has the advan-
tage of
requiring
only
PCR
amplification,
unlike
the
ZFX/ZFY system, which requires a digestion step after
PCR. In addition, the amelogenin system does not require an
internal positive control to detect PCR failure like the SRY
system does (Palsbøll et al. 1992; Takahashi et al. 1998).
However, we obtained bands of same size from sea otter
DNA regardless of the sex, and we could not determine sex
from PCR products using the amelogenin primer sets.
A variety of animals have been examined using the human
sex-typing primer set 1 (Amel-A/Amel-B; Buel et al. 1995).
That study suggested that the Amel-A/Amel-B gene (part of
the amelogenin intron 1) was found only on the X chromo-
some of many species, including cattle, which would also
result in the absence of gender differences. Nevertheless, sex
has been determined in cattle with primer set 2 (SE47/48, which
amplifies part of amelogenin exon 5; Ennis and Gallagher
1994) and in the horse with another primer set (AMESC-1/2,
which amplifies part of amelogenin exon 5; Fukushima et al.
1999). Primer set 2 also revealed a polymorphism in PCR
products from the Japanese black bear (Ursus thibetanus
japonicus) (Yamamoto et al. 2002), brown bear (Ursus arctos)
(H. Tsuruga, personal communication), and sun bear (Helarctos
malayanus) (M. Onuma, personal observation). On the other
hand, primer set 2 is unsuitable for determining the sex of the
raccoon dog (Nyctereutes procyonoides) (Y. Furukawa, personal
communication) and some mustelid species (R. Masuda, per-
sonal communication). The polymorphism in the amplified
amelogenin region using primer set 2 might be found among
Ursidae but not among Mustelidae or Canidae. Primer set 2
might be applicable to other species of Ursidae.
In conclusion, we established a rapid and reliable nested
PCR-based method for determining sex from sea otter tissues
and dental pulp. We suggest that this method can be used for
museum specimens and archaeological samples. Such speci-
mens can provide valuable information about the historical
wild population of the sea otter. Furthermore, the method
may be applied to other species by selecting appropriate
species-specific restriction enzymes.
Amplified
Not amplified
Total
No.
%
No.
%
Longer ZFX/ZFY region
315
55
17.5
260a
82.5
Shorter ZFX/ZFY region
260a
126
48.5
134b
51.5
Total
315
181
57.5
134b
42.5
aThe shorter ZFX/ZFY region was amplified by nested PCR from the
260 samples that failed in amplification of the longer ZFX/ZFY region.
bIn total, neither the longer nor the shorter ZFX/ZFY region was
amplified from 134 samples.
Table 3. Results of amplification of longer and shorter ZFX/ZFY
regions.
Fig. 3. Sequence of amplified fragments from the sea otter ZFX/ZFY region and location of NlaIII sites (double-underlined). Sequence
differences in ZFY relative to ZFX are marked with the appropriate nucleotides. Dots indicate identical nucleotides. Single-underlined
sequences indicate primers for longer ZFX/ZFY amplification. The thick single lines show the sequences of novel primers.
Fig. 4. Results of nested PCR from one male sample and one
female sample. (a) Amplification products of the longer and
shorter ZFX/ZFY regions. Lane 1, 100-bp molecular ruler; lanes
2 and 3, amplification by P1-5EZ/P2-3EZ for the longer
ZFX/ZFY region (447 bp); lanes 4 and 5, amplification by
KH1/KH2 for the shorter ZFX/ZFY region (165 bp) directly;
lanes 6 and 7, amplification by nested PCR. In lanes 2–4, no
fragment was amplified; in lane 5, the shorter ZFX/ZFY region
was amplified but weak. Seven microlitres of the amplified prod-
ucts was loaded per well. (b) NlaIII restriction-fragment profiles
of nested PCR products. Lane 1, 100-bp molecular ruler; lanes 2
and 3, fragments digested with NlaIII.


© 2003 NRC Canada
56
Can. J. Zool. Vol. 81, 2003
Acknowledgments
We thank N. Pavlov, T. Dakhno, V.N. Brukanov, and C.
Takahashi for sample preparation. We are also grateful to H.
Tsuruga, R. Masuda, K. Murata, and Y. Furukawa for excel-
lent technical assistance. The support of colleagues in the
Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido Univer-
sity, is appreciated.
References
Aasen, E., and Medrano, J.F. 1990. Amplification of the ZFY and
ZFX genes for sex identification in humans, cattle, sheep and
goats. Bio/Technology, 8: 1279–1281.
Baba, O. 1936. Report from the second archaeological investiga-
tion in Shumushu Island, north Kuril Islands. [In Japanese.] J.
Anthropol. Soc. Tokyo, 51: 1–25.
Bergerud, A.T. 1964. Relationship of mandible length to sex in
Newfoundland caribou. J. Wildl. Manage. 28: 54–56.
Buel, E., Wang, G., and Schwartz, M. 1995. PCR amplification of
animal DNA with human X–Y amelogenin primers used in gen-
der determination. J. Forensic Sci. 40: 641–644.
Ennis, S., and Gallagher, T.F. 1994. A PCR-based sex-determination
assay in cattle based on the bovine amelogenin locus. Anim.
Genet. 25: 425–427.
Fukushima, Y., Mukoyama, H., Sato, F., Hasegawa, T., Ishida, N.,
and Muramatsu, S. 1999. Sex determination of equine somatic
and germ cells by PCR amplification based on the sequence
polymorphism of X- and Y-chromosomal amelogenin genes. [In
Japanese with English summary.] Anim. Sci. J. 70: J6–J10.
Gordon, K.R., and Morejohn, G.V. 1975. Sexing black bear skulls
using lower canine and lower molar measurement. J. Wildl. Manage.
39: 40–44.
Kenyon, K.W. 1969. The sea otter in the eastern Pacific Ocean. N.
Am. Fauna, 68: 1–352.
Kitagamae, Y. 1980. Culture of capturing marine mammal and sea
otter. [In Japanese.] Archaeol. Hokkaido, 16: 1–13.
Masuda, R., and Yoshida, M.C. 1994. Nucleotide sequence varia-
tion of cytochrome b genes in three species of weasels Mustela
itatsi, Mustela sibirica, and Mustela nivalis, detected by im-
proved PCR product – direct sequencing technique. J. Mamm.
Soc. Jpn. 19: 33–43.
Murakami, M., Fujise, H., Lee, Y., Matsuba, C., and Fujitani, H.
2001. Reliable sex identification of dogs by modified PCR/RFLP
analysis. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 63: 679–681.
Murata, K., Taki, M., and Masuda, R. 1996. PCR-amplification of
SRY gene for sexing a newborn sea otter, Enhydra lutris, using
the placenta and umbilical cord. [In Japanese with English sum-
mary.] J. Jpn. Assoc. Zool. Aqua. 38: 48–51.
Palsbøll, P.J., Vader, A., Bakke, I., and El-Gewely, M.R. 1992.
Determination of gender in cetaceans by the polymerase chain
reaction. Can. J. Zool. 70: 2166–2170.
Roest, A.I. 1985. Determining the sex of sea otters from skulls.
Calif. Fish Game, 71: 179–183.
Ryazanov, D.A., and Maminov, M.K. 1996. Age and sex determi-
nation from canine teeth in sea otter (Enhydra lutris). [In Rus-
sian with English summary.] Zool. Zh. 75: 593–601.
Schwerin, M., and Pitra, C. 1994. Sex determination in spotted hy-
ena (Crocuta crocuta) by restriction fragment length poly-
morphism of amplified ZFX/ZFY loci. Theriogenology, 41:
553–559.
Scribner, K.T., Bodkin, J., Ballachey, B., Fain, S.R., Cronin, M.A.,
and Sanchez, M. 1997. Population genetic studies of the sea
otter (Enhydra lutris): a review and interpretation of available
data. In Molecular genetics of marine mammals. Edited by A.E.
Dizon, S.J. Chivers, and W.F. Perrin. Spec. Publ. No. 3, Society
for Marine Mammals, Lawrence, Kans. pp. 197–208.
Shindo, S., and Yoshioka, N. 1998. Sex determination of the sam-
ples excavated from the old ruins. [In Japanese with English
summary.] Res. Pract. Forensic Med. 41: 41–45.
Sullivan, K.M., Mannucci, A., Kimpton, C.P., and Gill, P. 1993. A
rapid and quantitative DNA sex test: fluorescence-based PCR
analysis of X–Y homologous gene amelogenin. BioTechniques,
15: 636–641.
Takahashi, M., Masuda, R., Uno, H., Yokoyama, M., Suzuki, M.,
Yoshida, M.C., and Ohtaishi, N. 1998. Sexing of carcass re-
mains of the Sika deer (Cervus nippon) using PCR amplification
of the Sry gene. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 60: 713–716.
Yamada, Y., Yamamoto, K., Yoshii, T., and Ishiyama, I. 1989.
Analysis of DNA from tooth and application to forensic dental
medicine. Jpn. J. Legal Med. 43: 420–423.
Yamamoto, K., Tsubota, T., Komatsu, T., Katayama, A., Murase,
T., Kita, I., and Kudo, T. 2002. Sex identification of Japanse
black bear, Ursus thibetanus japonicus, by PCR based on
amelogenin gene. J. Vet. Med. Sci. 64: 505–508.
