--- 
source: 삵과 고양이의 먹이 중복.pdf
--- 

Mammal Study 28: 47–56 (2003)
 © the Mammalogical Society of Japan
Habitat and prey resource overlap between the Iriomote cat 
Prionailurus iriomotensis and introduced feral cat Felis catus based on 
assessment of scat content and distribution
Shinichi Watanabe*, Nozomi Nakanishi and Masako Izawa
Faculty of Science, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0213, Japan
Abstract.
The Iriomote cat Prionailurus iriomotensis occurs only on Iriomote Island in the Ryukyu
Archipelago of southern Japan.  The population is estimated at 100 individuals and is on the decline.
We examined resource overlap for prey and habitat between this species and introduced cats Felis
catus by scat census and analysis of scat contents.  The distribution of scats was completely different
between the two species.  The distribution of scats from Iriomote cats was associated with
environmental factors such as vegetation types and terrain conditions, while the distribution of scats
from feral cats mainly depended on locations of garbage dumps.  Although the feral cat heavily
utilized human rubbish, it also preyed upon thirteen species of native animals, ten of which were also
used by Iriomote cats.  From 1997 to 2001, the number of observed scats from Iriomote cats declined
significantly, while feral cat scat became more common.  Feral cats on Iriomote Island still depend
on humans, but the expansion of their distribution into habitats of Iriomote cats may increase the
competition for prey and habitat resources in the future.
Key words: Felis catus, habitat use, interspecific competition, introduced species, Prionailurus
iriomotensis.
Introduced species often greatly affect local fauna and
flora through predation, resource competition and
hybridization with native species (Elton 1958; Diamond
and Case 1986; Ecological Society of Japan 2002).  Iso-
lated fauna and flora with a small number of species are
particularly vulnerable to invasive introduced species
(Elton 1958; Diamond and Case 1986; Frankel and Soulé
1981).  In recent history, 75% of extinctions of birds and
mammals have occurred on isolated islands, and 43% of
these were caused by introduced predators (Frankel and
Soulé 1981).  Species are more susceptible in islands
because of restricted habitats and lack of experience with
new predators, and are often at a competitive disadvan-
tage against aggressive invasive species (Frankel and
Soulé 1981).  Well-documented examples occurred in
Australia and New Zealand, where unique fauna in iso-
lated habitats were affected by introduced carnivores like
dingos Canis lupus dingo, feral cats Felis catus, and red
foxes Vulpes vulpes.  Predation on native marsupials and
terrestrial birds pushed many populations to threatened
status or even extinction (Kitching and Jones 1981; King
1984).  In Okinawa and the Amami Islands of southern
Japan, mongooses introduced to control a venomous
snake (Habu Trimeresurus flavoviridis) and rats have
become established in vacant niches.  As a result, many
rare or endemic species of amphibians, reptiles, terres-
trial birds, and mammals have been preyed upon and
threatened (Abe et al. 1991, 1998; Ogura et al. 2002;
Kawauchi and Sasaki 2002; Ministry of the Environment
2002a, b, c).
Introduced species often compete for prey and habitat
resources against native species, but the impacts of com-
petition are notably stronger on closely related species
(Diamond and Case 1986; Ecological Society of Japan
2002).  The Iriomote cat Prionailurus iriomotensis is a
small felid and inhabits only Iriomote Island of the
Ryukyu Archipelago.  This species is listed as endan-
gered because of its restricted habitat and small popula-
tion size, (IUCN 2000) estimated at approximately 100
individuals (JWRC 1994).  The population has declined
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.  E-mail: k018559@eve.u-ryukyu.ac.jp


48
Mammal Study
28 (2003)
during the last decade due to habitat loss from develop-
ment and mortality from traffic accidents (Izawa and Doi
1991).  While P. iriomotensis is the only native member
of the order Carnivora on Iriomote Island, the introduced
feral cat F. catus distribution has been expanding away
from human settlements, often following new road
construction.
Among carnivores, scat provides information about
individuals at specific sites (Macdonald 1980).  The
Iriomote cat leaves scat on exposed surfaces such as
on bare lands, rocks, and roads (Sakaguchi et al. 1986).
Sakaguchi et al. (1986) frequently observed scats from
Iriomote cats along streams, along the edges of forests
and grasslands.  Scats were not present in the interior
of cultivated fields, grasslands, or barren ground.  Similar
patterns of habitat use were observed in radio-tracking
surveys (Watanabe 2001; Watanabe et al. 2001).  Saka-
guchi et al. (1986) also suggested that the distribution
of scat from Iriomote cats reflects both habitat use and
specific preferences for latrine sites.  In the current
study, we used scat locations to evaluate habitat use by
both Iriomote cats and feral cats.  We also assessed prey
preferences through fecal analysis of both species.
Study area
The study was conducted on Iriomote Island (284 km2,
24°20’N, 123°49’E) located in the southern Ryukyu
Archipelago, Japan.  The climate is warm-temperate to
subtropical with average monthly temperatures ranging
from 17°C in January to 29°C in July, and average
annual precipitation of approximately 2,300 mm at the
Iriomote Meteorological Station.  Most of the island is
dominated by highly folded mountains (the highest point
= 469 m, Mt. Komi) and covered with subtropical ever-
green broad-leaved forests dominated by Castanopsis
sieboldii and Quercus miyagii.  Flatlands occur only
along the coast, where human activities, cultivated fields
and villages are concentrated.  About 2,000 people live
on the island, mostly inhabiting twelve villages along the
coast.
The study site is in the eastern part of the island near
two small villages (Fig. 1) with populations of 70 people
in Komi and 24 people in Mihara in January 2002.  A
paved road, 5 m wide and 50 km long was constructed in
1976.  We established a 6 km census route on the road
divided into 24 sections (a–x) at 250 m intervals (Fig. 1).
The route crosses three streams, and traverses subtropi-
Fig. 1.
Location of the census route to collect scats on Iriomote Island in the Ryukyu Archipelago of southern Japan.  A census route along a
paved road six kilometers long and five meters wide was divided into 24 sections (a–x) at 250 m intervals.


49
Watanabe et al., Resource overlap of native and feral cats
cal evergreen forests, rice fields, cultivated fields, man-
groves, and swampy forests.  The two villages are along
sections h–j (Komi) and adjacent to sections w–x
(Mihara).  Two garbage dumps are located 250 m away
from section i in a cane field and 50 m away from section
u in a forest.
According to the statistical reports of Taketomi Town
Office, while the population on Iriomote Island grew
from 1,892 people in 1995 to at least 1,976 people in
2000, visitor numbers increased from 201,967 people in
1995 to 285,080 people in 2000.
Methods
Scat census
Scats were collected by one or two observers walking
along both sides of the route at the end of each month
from November 1997 to October 2001.  Locations, cir-
cumstances, and conditions of scat were recorded during
these censuses.
Scat identification
It was necessary to distinguish between the scats of
the two cat species at the point of collection.  Scat of P.
iriomotensis can be easily distinguished by the specific
odors secreted from anal glands (Imaizumi et al. 1977;
Sakaguchi et al. 1986).  Fecal odors withstand weather-
ing and degradation for longer periods than the interval
between our censuses.  Therefore, scats having the
specific odor of P. iriomotensis could be positively
identified based on the odor.  However, scat with no
characteristic odors could not be designated as F. catus
scat without further evidence.  Since mammals ingest
their own hair during grooming and pass it in their scat
(Imaizumi et al. 1977), we characterized cat hairs in scat
at the time of collection and during lab analysis.
Although some feral cats have similar collar patterned
fur to that of Iriomote cats, hairs in scat were clearly
identified by hair-length, solidity, and color pattern when
viewed under a stereomicroscope.
Analysis of scat content
Collected scats were washed on 1 mm mesh sieve.
Remnants were dried and identified as hair, bone frag-
ments, teeth, feathers, scales, and arthropod chitin using
reference samples of potential prey species collected in
the study area.  We tried to identify prey to the level of
species depending on the type and the quality of the
sample.  Frequency of occurrence (the number of scats
containing a prey type/total number of analyzed scats)
was calculated for each prey type and for each taxon
(mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fishes, insects,
crustaceans, and others).
Analysis of scat distribution
Habitat utilization of P. iriomotensis is reported to be
affected by environmental factors including terrain and
vegetation (Watanabe 2001; Watanabe et al. 2001).  In
this study, we analyzed the relationships between scat
locations for the two cat species and the surrounding
environment by using a geographic information system
(GIS).
Deflection of scat distribution was tested for each
species by one-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.  Scat
distribution was compared between species by two-
sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.
Multiple regression models were developed according
to quantification theory type I (Hayashi 1952) for the dis-
tribution of scat of the two species.  The total number
of scats collected in each section was the dependent
variable and six environmental factors were independent
variables.  Three variables related to terrain: (1) mean
elevation, (2) mean slope in each section, and (3) dis-
tance from streams to the center of each section, were
derived from digital elevation models (Digital Map 50 m
mesh, Elevation published by Geographical Survey
Institute, Japan).  Vegetation type (4) in each section
was categorized as forest, rice field and swamp, and
cultivated and bare land according to digital vegetation
data, from the Natural Environment Information GIS
(Environment Agency 1999).  Variables related to human
activities such as (5) distance from garbage dumps, and
(6) distance from residential areas to the center of
each section were calculated using GIS software, IDRISI
version 32.2 (Clark Labs, The Idrisi Project).  Multiple
regression analysis was performed using a macro in
Microsoft Excel.
All independent variables were categorized, and each
variable was evaluated with a category score (CS).  Posi-
tive effects are given a positive score and negative
effects are given a negative score with the absolute value
indicating the strength of the effect.  The magnitude of
the effect of environmental variables is indicated by
partial correlation coefficients (PCC) (Hayashi 1952).


50
Mammal Study
28 (2003)
Results
Scat identification
From November 1997 to October 2001, 272 scats
were collected in 48 censuses.  Scat odors allowed sepa-
ration of the samples into two categories.  Odors from
236 scats were identified as those of P. iriomotensis, and
36 scats emitted odors distinctly associated with F. catus.
We excluded weathered and eroded scat from the analy-
sis of scat content, and examined contents of 156 scat
samples from P. iriomotensis and 31 scats with distinct
odors different from those of P. iriomotensis.
Based on hair content analysis, 83.9% of scats in
the group without the specific odor associated with P.
iriomotensis contained hairs of feral cats, and none con-
tained hairs of P. iriomotensis.  Hairs of P. iriomotensis
are longer (3–5 cm), harder and substantial with a
banded pattern of dark brown and white.  Hairs in scats
with odors different from P. iriomotensis were shorter
(2–3 cm), thinner and slight with the white un-patterned
colors hairs of F. catus.  Hair content analysis supported
the results of odor analysis.  After assigning a species for
Table 1.
Frequency of occurrences of prey items found in 156 scats of P. iriomotensis and 31 scats of F. catus
collected along a paved road in the eastern part of Iriomote Island from 1997 to 2001.
Prey item
P. iriomotensis
F. catus
Frequency of occurrence (%)
MAMMALIA
*Rattus rattus
23.1
9.7
Sus scrofa riukiuanus
0.6
Pteropus dasymallus yaeyamae
3.2
AVES
Egretta garzetta
3.2
Accipiter gularis
0.6
Rallina eurizonoides
1.3
*Amaurornis phoenicurus
6.4
3.2
Streptopelia orientalis
1.3
*Chalcophaps indica yamashinai
0.6
3.2
Sphenurus formosae
0.6
*Halcyon coromanda bangsi
0.6
3.2
Turdus pallidus
3.2
Turdus spp.
1.3
Corvus macrorhynchos osai
5.8
Unknown spp. of Ardeidae sized birds
3.2
Unknown spp. of Rallidae sized birds
11.5
Unknown spp. of Turdidae sized birds
5.1
16.1
Unknown spp. of Zosteropidae sized birds
6.4
Unknown spp. of Aves
0.6
3.2
REPTILIA
Japalura polygonata ishigakiensis
5.1
Eumeces kishinouyei
11.5
Eumeces spp.
4.5
Dinodon rufozonatus
0.6
Elaphe taeniura
1.9
Trimeresurus elegans
0.6
Unknown spp. of Colubridae
2.6
AMPHIBIA
*Rana (Limnonectes) sp.
19.2
3.2
Rana supranarina
0.6
Rana supranarina or utsunomiyaorum
1.9
Rana spp.
10.3
Rhacophorus owstoni
4.5
Microhyla ornata
2.6
Unknown spp. of Anura
10.9
*: Ten prey items identified are overlapped between two cat species.


51
Watanabe et al., Resource overlap of native and feral cats
each scat, we examined the distribution of 236 scat
locations for P. iriomotensis and 36 scat locations for
F. catus.
Comparison of food habits
Identity and frequency of occurrence of prey species
in scats from the two cat species are shown in Table 1.
From a total of 46 prey species, three species of
mammals, ten birds, five reptiles, four amphibians, a fish,
eighteen insects, at least two crustaceans, two spiders,
and a gastropod were identified in the scats of P. iriomo-
tensis.  Artifacts from garbage were not found in scats of
P. iriomotensis, but occurred in 87.1% of scats from F.
catus, and 35.5% of these scats contained only artifacts
such as pieces of paper, plastic bags, and silver foil.
However, 61.3% of F. catus scats contained thirteen
species of native animals: a mammal, three birds, an
amphibian, seven insects, and a spider.  Although ten of
these prey species overlapped with prey found in scats of
P. iriomotensis, three species of insects were not
recorded on the prey list of P. iriomotensis.
The frequency of occurrence for each prey taxon of
Table 1 (continued)
Prey item
P. iriomotensis
F. catus
Frequency of occurrence (%)
OSTEICHTHYES
Unknown spp. of Perciformes
2.6
INSECTA
Pycnoscelis surinomensis
0.6
Periplaneta suzukii
0.6
Rhabdoblatta guttigera
0.6
R. yayeyamana
1.3
Diestrammena apicalis
0.6
Diestrammena sp.
2.6
Euconocephalus thunbergi
6.5
Unknown spp. of Tettigoniidae
1.3
6.5
*Teleogryllus occipitalis
1.9
9.7
*Duolandrevus coulonianus
1.9
6.5
*Cardiodactylus novaeguineae
9.0
9.7
Unknown spp. of Blattidae
2.6
Gryllotalpa orientalis
1.9
Aiolopus tamulus
0.6
*Hieroglyphus annulicornis
3.2
Unknown spp. of Catantopidae
1.9
3.2
Unknown spp. of Orthoptera
1.3
3.2
Platypleura yayeyamana
0.6
Meimuna iwasakii
3.2
Unknown spp. of Carabidae
0.6
Unknown spp. of Scarabaeidae
0.6
3.2
Unknown spp. of Hymenoptera
0.6
Unknown spp. of Insecta
3.2
CRUSTACEA
Macrobrachium spp.
3.8
Unknown spp. of Crabs
0.6
Unknown spp. of Decapoda
0.6
ARACHNIDA
Macrotheis gigas
1.3
Heteropoda sp.
0.6
*Unknown sp. of Araneae
0.6
3.2
GASTROPODA
Acusta despecta despecta
0.6
PLANT
Gramineae
38.5
16.1
ARTIFACTS
Garbage
87.1
*: Ten prey items identified are overlapped between two cat species.


52
Mammal Study
28 (2003)
P. iriomotensis was calculated as follows: birds (52%),
amphibians (37%), insects (28%), mammals (26%),
and reptiles (23%).  Among the food items of F. catus,
human-derived artifacts occurred more frequently than
any prey type, but the frequency of birds (26%) was rela-
tively high and insects (35%) occurred more frequently
than in P. iriomotensis (28%).
Scats from feral cats containing native prey were more
distant from garbage dumps (465 ± 335 m with native
prey, n = 19; 280 ± 211 m without native prey, n = 12)
and residential areas (404 ± 359 with native prey and
335 ± 218 m without native prey).  However, these
differences were not significant (Mann-Whitney U test,
P > 0.05).
Number of scats
While P. iriomotensis scats were found in most cen-
suses, F. catus scats were found in only twelve censuses
(25%) during the study period.  Felis catus scats were
rarely found before 2000, then were consistently found
from May to December 2000, and were rarely found
after January 2001.  The number of scats collected in
each census period for P. iriomotensis had a range of 0–
20, with a mean and standard deviation of 4.92 ± 4.45 (n
= 48) (Fig. 2).  Scats from F. catus had a range of 0–11,
0.75 ± 1.92 (n = 48) for each census (Fig. 2).  The num-
ber of P. iriomotensis scats collected per period was 8.92
± 5.65 in the first year (November 1997 to October
1998), 5.08 ± 3.29 in the second year, 3.58 ± 2.71 in the
third year, and 2.08 ± 2.50 in the fourth year.  Multiple
comparison analysis of the four years of grouped data
shows that the number of scats collected in the third and
the fourth years were significantly lower than in the first
year (Tukey’s HSD multiple comparison test, P < 0.05).
When annual samples were used to calculate an average
number of F. catus scats collected per census period, the
average was 0.08 ± 0.29 in the first year, 0.08 ± 0.29 in
the second year, 2.33 ± 3.23 in the third year, and 0.50 ±
1.17 in the fourth year.  The number of F. catus scats in
the third year was significantly higher than in the first
and the second years (Tukey’s HSD multiple comparison
test, P < 0.05).
Distribution of scats
The distributions of scats from both cat species are
shown in Fig. 3.  The number of scats collected differed
Fig. 2.
Monthly fluctuations in the number of P. iriomotensis and F. catus scats collected in censuses conducted from November 1997 to
October 2001.


53
Watanabe et al., Resource overlap of native and feral cats
significantly among census sections for both species
(one-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test; P. iriomotensis:
D = 0.254, F. catus: D = 0.611, d.f. = 23, P < 0.001).
The distribution pattern between the two species also
differed significantly (two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test: D = 0.417, d.f. =23, P < 0.05).  Scats of P. iriomo-
tensis were not found in sections g–j adjacent to the vil-
lage, but were abundant in sections a–f and l–r.  At least
one F. catus scat was found in each of sections f and j
adjacent to the village and within sections q–x.  Felis catus
scats were most abundant in section u adjacent to a
garbage dump.  There was a slightly negative correlation
between numbers of scats of the two species, however it
was not significant (r = –0.36, P = 0.087).
Predictive model of scat distribution
Of the six independent variables identified in this
study, only mean elevation and distance from garbage
dumps were found to be significantly correlated (r =
–0.71, P < 0.01) in a correlation matrix.  Locations of
garbage dumps were an important factor for feral cats
but elevation in the census route varied only from 2 to
55 m; presumably the small difference does not directly
affect habitat preferences.  Therefore, mean elevation
was excluded from the multivariate analysis of scat
distribution to avoid distortion caused by significant
correlation among independent variables (Hayashi 1952).
Significant correlation was not found among any other
combinations (P > 0.05).
Multivariate analysis (Table 2) gives coefficients of
determination (R2) indicating particularly high accuracy
in the predicted models of scat distributions of both spe-
cies.  However, the accuracy of the model of F. catus (R2
= 0.906, F = 12.5, d.f. = 10, 13, P = 0.00004) was higher
than that for P. iriomotensis’s (R2 = 0.804, F = 53.4, d.f.
= 10, 13, P = 0.0031).  Predicted and observed values
were compared to verify the goodness of fit (Fig. 3).  In
the model of F. catus, there were small residual errors
between predicted and observed values in all sections;
however, there were large errors in some sections in the
model of P. iriomotensis.  Absolute values of these
residuals (predicted values minus observed values)
were smaller in F. catus (0.63 ± 0.51, mean ± SD, n =
24) than in P. iriomotensis (3.1 ± 2.2, n = 24).
Scat distribution of P. iriomotensis was most affected
by distance from garbage dumps.  The CS predicted that
Fig. 3.
Number of scats observed and predicted values derived from a predictive model for P. iriomotensis and F. catus, along the census route.
Two villages are located in sections h–j and at w–x, and garbage dumps are adjacent to sections i and u.


54
Mammal Study
28 (2003)
P. iriomotensis would be less common in the vicinity of
garbage dumps and residential areas than in areas far
away from these sites, more abundant in forests, rice
fields and swamps than in cultivated and bare land, and
less abundant on flat land than steep land.  However, for
distance from streams, there is no clear trend for the
category within 100 m.  P. iriomotensis was expected
to be less abundant within 100–200 m of streams and
more abundant in distances of over 200 m.
The scat distribution of F. catus was most affected by
distance from garbage dumps, followed by slope, dis-
tance from residential areas, and vegetation type, and
least affected by distance from streams.  The only areas
of distribution overlap with P. iriomotensis were rela-
tively abundant areas of rice fields, swamps and steep
lands, while their scats were abundant in vicinities of
garbage dumps and residential areas.  Although scats
from F. catus were also relatively abundant on steep
slopes (slope over 5°), this might reflect the location of
garbage dump in section u located on steep slope.
Within vegetation types, scats were relatively abundant
in cultivated and bare lands compared to forests.  While
the distribution of P. iriomotensis was affected by many
environmental factors, F. catus was most strongly
affected by distance from garbage dumps.
Discussion
The accuracy of the predicted model of F. catus scat
distribution was higher than for P. iriomotensis because
of the strong association between F. catus and garbage
dumps.  Scats of F. catus were less abundant in forests
compared to cultivated and bare lands.  Nakamura (2000)
reported that a radio-tagged F. catus in section g–j
depended on residents and utilized only residential areas
and cultivated land.  The model for P. iriomotensis
included other environmental factors.  Scat distributions
of P. iriomotensis were affected by human activities
(avoided garbage dumps and residential areas), vegeta-
tion types (preferred forests, rice fields and swamps, and
avoided cultivated land and bare land) and terrain condi-
tions (avoided flat open spaces).  Radio-tracking surveys
(Watanabe 2001; Watanabe et al. 2001) confirm that
frequently used areas coincide with areas of high scat
abundance.  In future studies, additional habitat varia-
bles assessed with higher resolution would create more
accurate predictive models of scat distributions for P.
iriomotensis.
Scats from F. catus contained many human-derived
artifacts, presumably from garbage, indicating a high
dependence on garbage for food resources.  On the other,
P. iriomotensis ate various prey and artifacts were never
Table 2.
Predictive models of scat distributions of P. iriomotensis and F. catus created by multivariate analysis, quantification theory
type I by Hayashi (1952) with five environmental variables.  CS = Category score, R = Range of category scores, PCC = Partial correla-
tion coefficient.
Variables
Category
n
P. iriomotensis
F. catus
CS
R
PCC
CS
R
PCC
Slope (°)
<2.5
7
–2.71
6.12
0.43
–1.03
3.83
0.86
2.5
<5
10
–0.14
–0.87
5
7
3.41
2.80
Distance from streamside (m)
<100
8
0.33
7.48
0.61
–0.42
0.66
0.30
100
<200
8
–3.90
0.24
200
8
3.58
0.17
Vegetation type
Forest
7
1.88
6.42
0.53
–0.75
1.14
0.36
Rice field & Swamp
8
2.62
0.38
Cultivated & Bare land
9
–3.80
0.24
Distance from garbage (m)
<400
3
–10.38
14.47
0.70
4.68
5.83
0.88
400
<800
9
–1.99
–1.16
800
12
4.09
–0.30
Distance from residence (m)
<400
11
–4.30
8.56
0.64
0.42
0.95
0.40
400
<800
6
2.91
–0.54
800
7
4.26
–0.19
Coefficient of determination (R2)
0.804
0.906
F
5.34
12.5
p
0.0031
0.00004


55
Watanabe et al., Resource overlap of native and feral cats
observed in scat, so the degree of dietary overlap was not
high.  However, F. catus also fed on various prey that
were also the main prey of P. iriomotensis including the
white-breasted water hen Amaurornis phoenicurus, the
Sakishima rice frog Rana (Limnonectes) sp., and the
spotted cricket Cardiodactylus novaeguineae, making
interspecific competition for prey resources possible.
Additionally, F. catus preyed on the emerald dove
Chalcophaps indica yamashinai, an endangered species
on the 2002 Red Data List of Ministry of the Environ-
ment.
In a study of food habits of feral cats on Okinawa,
an island in the middle of Ryukyu archipelago, the cats
did not depend only on human-derived foods, but had
a diet very similar to P. iriomotensis, preying upon
various native animals ranging from mammals to insects
(Kawauchi and Sasaki 2002).  In Australia, feral cats are
also reported to prey and impact various native animals.
While perhaps initially depending on human on resi-
dents, they adapted to inhabit a wide range of habitats in
Australia (Dickman 1996).  In our study area, F. catus is
not completely feral as in the above studies, yet even at
this stage, feral cats fed upon many types of prey, some-
times more frequently for insects than P. iriomotensis.
Scats found far away from garbage dumps and resi-
dential areas tended to contain more native prey.  Feral
cats in our study area frequently hunt abundant and vul-
nerable prey such as insects at the present stage.  If the
population of F. catus grows and expands beyond the
garbage dumps and residential areas, it is possible that
feral cats with feeding habits similar to P. iriomotensis
may compete for the same habitat resources.
The number of P. iriomotensis scats collected declined
significantly over our study period.  The Kumamoto
Regional Forest Office of the Forestry Agency had irreg-
ularly conducted scat censuses along the route in January
1995 and October 1997; more P. iriomotensis scat (18.0
± 11.3, n = 11) were collected than in our study period
and no F. catus scat were collected (Forestry Agency
1995; Environment Agency and Forestry Agency 1996,
1998).  Although interspecific competition for spatial
habitat resources is a possible explanation, it is con-
sidered unlikely.  Habitat preferences differed between
species, and there was a slight negative correlation in
the abundance of scat of P. iriomotensis and F. catus,
indicating distinct habitat utilization.  Watanabe et al.
(2002) reported that the population of P. iriomotensis
was declining due to habitat loss due to recent human
developments.  In the study area, road and bridges had
been expanded, and traffic due to construction vehicles
and tourists increased during the 4-years period.  The
more plausible explanation for the decline is that the
habitat of P. iriomotensis was drastically reduced.  In
contrast the preferred habitat of F. catus increased, and
this might be reflected in increasing appearance of F.
catus scat.  A growing volume of garbage derived from
the growing number of tourists likely supplied plenty of
food for population growth of F. catus.
Another native felid in Japan, the Tsushima leopard
cat Prionailurus bengalensis euptilura and F. catus both
inhabit Tsushima Islands of northern Kyushu, Japan.
Nishimura et al. (1999) reported that a native individual
of Tsushima leopard cat was infected by FIV (Feline
immunodeficiency virus: a causative agent of AIDS-like
disease and immunological abnormalities in F. catus)
and cautioned that the spread of epidemics seriously
affects non-resistant native species.  Therefore it is
expected that the increasing feral cat population on Irio-
mote Island has the potential to impact P. iriomotensis
pathologically as well as ecologically through resource
competition.
Although the preferred habitats for each species are
different, there is some possibility of contact between
feral and native cats on Iriomote Island.  Some scats of
F. catus in our study area were found 700 m away from
garbage dumps and residential areas, and we sometimes
observed the same individual feral cats traveling in wide
ranges between section u–x during the study period.
Their ranges might have expanded widely from the
garbage dumps using the paved road as a path.  Radio-
tagged Iriomote cats did not utilize the residential areas,
but scats of F. catus were found in the home ranges of
Iriomote cats, especially in areas adjacent to the garbage
dump in section u (Watanabe 2001).  It suggests that
contact between the two species is unlikely to occur in
residential areas, but is likely near garbage dumps in
forested areas.  Therefore, we propose that immediate
action be taken to control the F. catus population and to
reduce access to garbage dumps before the cats become
well-adapted to native habitats.
Acknowledgments:  We are grateful to Kumamoto Re-
gional Forestry Office of Forestry Agency and Iriomote
Wildlife Conservation Center (IWCC) of the Ministry of
the Environment for supporting this research.  We also
appreciate the help we received from Dr. T. Doi, Kyushu
University, and Dr. M. Okamura, IWCC, and people in
the Ecology laboratory of the Faculty of Science, Uni-


56
Mammal Study
28 (2003)
versity of the Ryukyus for precious comments, and the
kindness of many local people, particularly Mr. M.
Matsumoto and Ms. C. Matsumoto during the field
survey.  We thank S. Aoki who programmed the macro
used in the multiple regression analysis in this study.
The scat censuses were conducted as a part of en-
dangered species conservation projects administered by
the Kumamoto Regional Forestry Office.  This study was
partly supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(B11480152) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science and Scientific Research (B08458165) from the
Ministry of Education, Science and Culture.
References
Abe, S., Handa,Y., Abe,Y., Takatsuki, Y. and Nigi, H. 1998.  Food
habits of feral mongoose (Herpestes sp.) on Amamioshima,
Japan. In (G. H. Rodda, Y. Sawai, D. Chiszar, H. Tanaka, eds.)
Problem Snake Management the Habu and the Brown Tree
Snake. Pp. 372–383. Comstock Publishing Associates a Division
of Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London.
Abe, S., Takatsuki,Y., Handa, Y. and Nigi, H. 1991.  Establishment
in the wild of the mongoose (Herpestes sp.) on Amami-oshima
Island. Honyurui Kagaku [Mammalian Science] 31: 23–36 (in
Japanese with English summary).
Diamond, J. and Case, T. J. 1986.  Overview: introductions, extinc-
tions, exterminations and invasions. In (J. Diamond and T. J.
Case, eds.) Community Ecology. Pp. 65–79. Harper & Row,
New York.
Dickman, C. R. 1996.  Overview of the Impacts of Feral Cats on Aus-
tralian Native Fauna. Australian Nature Conservation Agency,
Canberra ACT, 92 pp.
Ecological Society of Japan. 2002.  Handbook of Alien Species in
Japan. Chijinshokan, Tokyo, 390 pp. (in Japanese).
Elton, C. S. 1958.  The Ecology of Invasion by Animals and Plants.
Methuen and Co., London, 181 pp.
Environment Agency. 1999.  Natural Environment Information GIS.
Nature Conservation Bureau, Tokyo, Japan.
Environment Agency and Forestry Agency. 1996.  The Report of
Patrol of the Iriomote Cat, Conservation Project for Rare Species
in 1995. Okinawa District Forest Office, Okinawa, 66 pp. (in
Japanese).
Environment Agency and Forestry Agency. 1998.  The Report of
Patrol of the Iriomote Cat, Conservation Project for Rare Species
in 1996. Okinawa District Forest Office, Okinawa, 64 pp. (in
Japanese).
Forestry Agency. 1995.  The Report of patrol of the Iriomote Cat,
Conservation Project for Rare Species in 1993 and 1994.
Okinawa District Forest Office, Okinawa, 41 pp. (in Japanese).
Frankel, O. H. and Soulé, M. E. 1981.  Conservation and Evolution.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 327 pp.
Hayashi, C. 1952.  On the prediction of phenomena from qualitative
data on the Quantification of qualitative data from the mathemat-
ico-statistical point of view. Annals of the Institute of Statistical
Mathematics 3: 69–98.
Imaizumi, Y., Imaizumi, T. and Tyabata, T. 1977.  Study on the
Ecology and Conservation of the Iriomote Cat, the Third Report.
Environment Agency, Tokyo, 129 pp. (in Japanese).
IUCN. 2000.  2000 IUCN Red list of Threatened Species. IUCN
Publication Service Unit, Cambridge, 61 pp.
Izawa, M. and Doi, T. 1991.  Status of conservation and management
of two cat species of Felidae in Japan. Honyurui Kagaku [Mam-
malian Science] 31: 15–22 (in Japanese with English abstract).
JWRC (Japan Wildlife Research Center). 1994.  The Third Report of
Special Research of the Iriomote Cat in 1993. JWRC, Tokyo,
101 pp. (in Japanese).
Kawauchi, N. and Sasaki, T. 2002.  Food habits and distribution of the
three introduced Carnivores (mongoose, feral cat, feral dog) in
forest region of northern part of Okinawa Island. Okinawa
Seibutu Gakkaishi [The Biological Magazine Okinawa] 40: 41–
50 (in Japanese with English abstract).
King, C. 1984.  Immigrant Killers: Introduced Predators and the
Conservation of Birds in New Zealand. Oxford University Press,
Melbourne, 224 pp.
Kitching, R. L. and Jones, R. E. 1981.  The Ecology of Pests: Some
Australian Case Histories. CSIRO Australia, Melbourne, 254 pp.
Macdnald, D. W. 1980.  Patterns of scent marking with urine and scat
amongst carnivore communities. Symposia of the Zoological
Society of London 45: 107–119.
Ministry of the Environment. 2002a.  Threatened Wildlife of Japan —
Red data Book 2nd ed. — Volume 1, Mammalia. JWRC (Japan
Wildlife Research Center), Tokyo, 177 pp. (in Japanese).
Ministry of the Environment. 2002b.  Threatened Wildlife of Japan —
Red data Book 2nd ed. — Volume 2, Aves. JWRC (Japan Wild-
life Research Center), Tokyo, 278 pp. (in Japanese).
Ministry of the Environment. 2002c.  Threatened Wildlife of Japan —
Red data Book 2nd ed. — Volume 3, Reptilia and Amphibia.
JWRC (Japan Wildlife Research Center), Tokyo, 120 pp. (in
Japanese).
Nakamura, Y. 2000.  Ecology and Infectious Diseases of the Domestic
Cat (Felis catus) on Iriomote Island. MC. thesis, University
of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, 19 pp. (in Japanese with English
abstract).
Nishimura, Y., Goto, Y., Yoneda, K., Endo, Y., Mizuno, T., Hamachi,
M., Maruyama, H., Kinoshita, H., Koga, S., Komori, M., Fush-
uku, S., Ushinohama, K., Akuzawa, M., Watari, T., Hasegawa, A.
and Tsujimoto, H. 1999.  Interspecies transmission of feline
immunodeficiency virus from the domestic cat to the Tsushima
cat (Felis bengalensis euptilura) in the wild. Journal of Virology
73: 7916–7921.
Ogura, G., Sasaki, T., Toyama, M., Takehara, K., Nakachi, M.,
Ishibashi, O., Kawashima,Y. and Oda, S. 2002.  Food habits
of the feral small Asian mongoose (Herpestes javanicus) and
impacts on native species in the northern part of Okinawa Island.
Honyurui Kagaku [Mammalian Science] 42: 53–62 (in Japanese
with English abstract).
Sakaguchi, N., Kohatsu, T., Miyagi, K. and Ikehara, S. 1986.  Distri-
bution of the scat of Iriomote cat, Mayailurus iriomotensis —
Special reference to the indices for utilization of the habitats —.
Okinawa Tosho Kenkyu [Island Studies in Okinawa] 4: 27–45 (in
Japanese with English abstract).
Watanabe, S. 2001.  Plasticity of Feeding Pattern Considering Home
Range Utilization Based on Geographic Information and Food
Habit of the Iriomote Cat Felis iriomotensis. MC. thesis, Univer-
sity of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, 24 pp.
Watanabe, S., Nakanishi, N., Izawa, M., Sakaguchi, N. and Doi, T.
2001.  Habitat analysis of the Iriomote cat using geographic
information and tracking data. Papers and proceedings of the
Geographic Information Systems Association 10: 345–348 (in
Japanese with English abstract).
Watanabe, S., Nakanishi, N., Sakaguchi, N., Doi, T. and Izawa, M.
2002.  Temporal Changes of land covers analyzed by satellite
remote sensing and habitat states of the Iriomote cat Prionailurus
iriomotensis. Bulletin of the International Association for Land-
scape Ecology-Japan 7: 25–34 (in Japanese with English abstract).
Received 16 January 2003. Accepted 4 April 2003.
